Dimitriadis et al. eLife 2024;13:RP91915. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.91915  1 of 29
Heron, a Knowledge Graph editor for
intuitive implementation of Python-­ based
experimental pipelines
George Dimitriadis1
*, Ella Svahn1,2
, Andrew F MacAskill2
, Athena Akrami1
1
Sainsbury Wellcome Centre, University College London, London, United Kingdom;
2
Department of Neuroscience, Physiology and Pharmacology, University College
London, London, United Kingdom
eLife Assessment
This valuable paper introduces Heron, lightweight scientific software that is designed to streamline
the implementation of complex experimental pipelines. The software is tailored for workflows that
require coordinating many logical steps across interconnected hardware components with heteroge-
neous computing environments. The authors convincingly demonstrate Heron's utility and effective-
ness in the context of behavioral experiments, addressing a growing need among experimentalists
for flexible and scalable solutions that accommodate diverse and evolving hardware requirements.
Abstract To realise a research project, experimenters face conflicting design and implementa-
tion choices across hardware and software. These include balancing ease of implementation – time,
expertise, and resources – against future flexibility, the number of opaque (black box) components
and reproducibility. To address this, we present Heron, a Python-­ based platform for constructing
and running experimental and data analysis pipelines. Heron allows researchers to design experi-
ments according to their own mental schemata, represented as a Knowledge Graph – a structure
that mirrors the logical flow of an experiment. This approach speeds up implementation (and subse-
quent updates), while minimising black box components, increasing transparency and reproduc-
ibility. Heron supports the integration of software and hardware combinations that are otherwise
too complex or costly, making it especially useful in experimental sciences with a large number of
interconnected components such as robotics, neuroscience, behavioural sciences, physics, chem-
istry, and environmental sciences. Unlike visual-­ only tools, Heron combines full control (of instrument
and software combinations) and flexibility with the ease of high-­ level programming and Graphical
User Interfaces. It assumes intermediate Python proficiency and offers a clean, modular code base
that encourages documentation and reuse. By removing inaccessible technical barriers, Heron
enables researchers without formal engineering backgrounds to construct sophisticated, reliable
and reproducible experimental setups – bridging the gap between scientific creativity and technical
implementation.
Introduction
One can divide an experiment’s life circle, from concept to a running system, into a number of trans-
formations. At first, the scientific question is mapped into an abstract schema of experimental steps
(i.e. what needs to happen in order to answer the question). Subsequently, these conceptual steps
are transformed into a schema of hardware connectivity and software logic. At this stage, the exper-
imenter thinks in terms of high-­ level objects like cameras and other types of sensors, time lines,
Tools and Resources
*For correspondence:
g.dimitriadis@ucl.ac.uk
Competing interest: See page
21
Funding: See page 21
Preprint posted
01 May 2023
Sent for Review
24 August 2023
Reviewed preprint posted
05 March 2024
Reviewed preprint revised
24 February 2025
Version of Record published
16 July 2025
Reviewing Editor: Gordon
J Berman, Emory University,
United States
‍ ‍Copyright Dimitriadis et al.
This article is distributed under
the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License,
which permits unrestricted use
and redistribution provided that
the original author and source
are credited.Tools and resources﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿ Neuroscience
Dimitriadis et al. eLife 2024;13:RP91915. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.91915  2 of 29
triggers and events, agents and rewards, inputs and outputs. The final challenging step, which is rarely
addressed (or even cognitively acknowledged), is to map the schema of the hardware and software
logic to the actual hardware connectivity and operational code bases. At this level, the experimenter
has to work with much lower-­ level objects like voltage differences, light intensities, TTL pulses, GPU
shaders, and information flow loops. This last and most time-­ consuming step can limit the number
of iterations for ideas to be piloted and tested. Once the mental schema has been translated into
code, it is this code that is usually addressed by other experimentalists in reproducibility efforts.
These efforts usually face a high barrier in understanding the original experimental schema starting
from its code implementation. This is because efficiently translating many lines of code (even if well
documented) back to what the code actually accomplishes is in most cases a difficult task that requires
years of coding experience, as well as familiarity with experimental designs. This barrier hinders efforts
of reproducibility and quality control and is one that cannot be addressed solely by open sourcing
one’s work. Finally, the complexity of the translation from mental schema to running code base makes
design iteration efforts practically impossible. The prohibitively large iteration time, on the one hand,
and the inter-­ dependency of engineering decisions throughout the implementation cycle, on the other
hand, make updates of the experimental flow extremely cumbersome. This often results in practically
one of the most serious experiment design and implementation hurdles. The need to create radically
new implementations for only small changes in the underlying mental schema. These arguments can
be seen as the main driver for the development and the rapid acceptance of high-­ level languages in
software engineering and of micro-­ controller kits (e.g. Arduino) in electrical engineering and robotics.
Concepts like object-­ oriented programming (Kindler and Krivy, 2011) or actor-­ based programming
(Agha, 1986) for example, have been nothing else but an effort to take away the low-­ level concepts
that one needs to ultimately manipulate and replace them with bundles of higher-­ level ones, easier
to cognise with.
In order to address this discrepancy between the mental schemata and implementation outcomes
in experimental construction, we developed Heron, an open source software (MIT license) platform
for the construction of data flow pipelines (e.g. experiments, data analysis, robotics, etc.). Heron
comes with a series of distinguishing features. The primary one is that it creates experimental pipe-
lines that visually and structurally bear a very significant resemblance to the original mental schema of
the experimental pipeline. So what one gets as the final experiment implementation is both semanti-
cally and syntactically very close to how one originally envisions the experiment should work. Because
of that, Heron creates final implementations that are easy to understand, construct, communicate, and
change. In this way, it often makes it fairly easy to put together helpful diagrams and documentation
eLife digest Complex scientific experiments often require setting up several pieces of hardware
and software that must work together seamlessly. It is crucial not only to connect these components
correctly, but also to design the setup in a way that others can easily replicate and adapt for similar
experiments.
Striking a balance between a system that works correctly and one that can be quickly adjusted
and understood by other users can be difficult. This is especially relevant when systems incorporating
complicated software and hardware are to be designed and used by scientists who may not have
expertise in those areas.
Dimitriadis et al. set out to create a software tool that would help researchers of all disciplines
build and run complex experiments more easily. The resulting platform, known as Heron, lets users
create setups by combining visual building blocks representing parts of an experiment. These blocks
are arranged in what is called a Knowledge Graph, which shows how different steps in the experiment
connect in a way that closely mirrors the thought process of the researcher.
This approach makes experiments quicker to set up, easier to update, and more transparent for
others to replicate or understand, especially in fields like robotics or neuroscience where complex
setups are common. It also results in code that is easier to understand, maintain and share with
others. These factors will help Heron to enhance how reproducible experimental setups are and allow
researchers to use combinations of hardware and software that would be difficult to achieve otherwise.Tools and resources﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿ Neuroscience
Dimitriadis et al. eLife 2024;13:RP91915. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.91915  3 of 29
by following Heron’s visual representation of the experiment and its underlying code. It also allows
for accurate inference of the real-­ time complexity of any proposed change even before any new code
is written.
A second distinguishing feature of Heron is that it targets the experimenter without expertise
in arcane subjects like networking, hardware connectivity, or low-­ level software–hardware interac-
tions. By abstracting away these low-­ level features in its Graphical User Interface (GUI), it allows the
construction of experiments with multiple, diverse hardware components, even using networks of
computers running different operating systems, without bothering the experimenter with having to
deal with all the low-­ level connectivity issues that arise. It achieves this without limiting its users to
preconceived ideas of how any single specific piece of hardware or code should be used. This is
possible as Heron offers users an Application Programming Interface – API – letting them write the
code that implements their own ideas at the optimal level of abstraction given the situation. Offering
Python as the main (but not only) language for this user-­ centric code implementation, Heron makes
it even easier for code novices to achieve highly complex experimental setups that are easy to both
construct and reconfigure. In the following section, we will focus on Heron as a general-­ purpose tool
for constructing pipelines used to conduct different types of experiments. Firstly, we will describe
the specific meaning of an experimental pipeline implemented as a Knowledge Graph (KG) (Fensel
et al., 2020). We then catalogue the design benefits and distinguishing features offered by Heron, in
comparison to other efforts targeting the construction of experiments. Subsequently, we will describe
the internal architecture of Heron with enough details to allow any developer to quickly get up to
speed with Heron’s code and contribute to its open source. Finally, we will illustrate a number of
Heron experimental implementations, currently in use in the lab, each showcasing one of Heron’s
special features.
Results
Mental schemata, KGs and Heron processes. The philosophy behind
Heron’s design
A mental schema is a psychological concept (Bartlett and Burt, 1933, Williams, 2019) that is meant
to define the way humans cognise. According to it, when people think, they categorise sensory expe-
riences and abstract notions into groups. They then utilise the relations between these groups to
draw conclusions about some hypotheses. Upon inputs from the environment and prior cognitive
outcomes, the categories and their relations can update fluidly (Williams, 2019). An example, for the
case of interest here, is the mental schema of an experiment. In order for an experiment to be devel-
oped, the experimenter brings together a set of categories, both based on their sensory experiences
(e.g. a laser, a data acquisition board, or a camera) and on abstract notions (e.g. time concurrency or
subject’s choices). Then a set of relationships is generated between them. The sets of these concepts
with their interactions define the mental schema of the specific experiment. For example, a camera
frame must be captured immediately after a specific event has taken place. Yet, today’s implementa-
tions of experimental pipelines are written (with visual or text-­ based code) such that they obfuscate
the mental schemata they derive from. A receiver of such a code base, irrespective of their under-
standing of the underlying language, always needs a significant amount of time and mental effort to
map back the initial mental schema. A KG (Fensel et al., 2020) is a mathematical structure designed
to capture the unstructured human knowledge on a subject (i.e. the mental schemata of different
individuals relating to the same knowledge corpus) in such a way that a machine could use it to test
propositions against the knowledge and also create novel propositions that a human with the knowl-
edge would find to be true. It is practically an effort to implement the fuzzy notion of a mental schema
into a concrete structure of objects and relations that is machine implementable. The fundamental
structures of a KG are its nodes and their attributes. Nodes are meant to represent a group of objects
at a desired level of abstraction, which does not have to be uniform among the different nodes of the
same KG. Nodes’ attributes define the state of each node and the edges that connect different nodes
representing their relationships. Nodes and their attributes usually have semantic labels.
Heron implements an experiment in the form of a KG and does so at two separate levels. One
is the graphical level, where a series of Nodes and their in-­ between links (Edges) are defined. The
second is the code that defines each Node’s functionality. The graphical level is used to construct a KGTools and resources﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿ Neuroscience
Dimitriadis et al. eLife 2024;13:RP91915. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.91915  4 of 29
representing the experiment. The text-­ based code level is used to implement the dynamics of each
Node in the Graph and define its level of abstraction. The KG’s Nodes are labelled and have human-­
readable attributes partially defining their state. They are also connected with directed Edges (links)
through their named input and output points. The Edges represent message passing between Nodes
(see Figure 1). In this way, a graphical representation of an experimenter’s mental schema is created
with each Node at the appropriate level of abstraction for the specific experiment. This individual-
ised level of abstraction is achieved through Heron’s second level of implementation, that is a text-­
based code that defines each Node’s functionality. This is an important distinction between Heron
and other node-­ based software like LabView and Bonsai (see Background section). Heron expects
that each Node’s behaviour and connectivity is defined by the experimenter, in normal, text-­ based
code, and comes with an appropriate API to facilitate this. In this way, Heron does not offer a long list
of predefined Nodes which would make very strong assumptions about the structure of the experi-
ment’s mental schema. Instead, it offers the tools for designing and implementing one’s own Nodes
in a case-­ by-­ case approach at a level of abstraction required at any time. For instance, if in one case
a Node representing a camera is required, while in another a Node should represent a large group of
Figure 1. Heron’s combination of graphical and text-­ based code development. (A) Schematic of Heron’s two levels of operation. Left shows a
Knowledge Graph made of Nodes with Names, named Parameters and named Input/Output points. Nodes are connected with links (Edges) that
define the flow of information. Right shows a piece of textual code that fully defines both the Node’s Graphical User Interface (GUI) appearance and the
processes run by the machine. (B) Heron’s implementation of A, where the Knowledge Graph is generated in Heron’s Node Editor window while the
code that each Node needs to be defined and the code that each Node is running is written in a separate Integrated Development Environment (IDE,
in this case PyCharm).Tools and resources﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿ Neuroscience
Dimitriadis et al. eLife 2024;13:RP91915. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.91915  5 of 29
synchronised cameras acting as one, Heron provides the tooling to create either of these Nodes with
minimum effort.
Heron’s code base is implemented in Python. This choice was informed by the need to keep the
code simple to implement while at the same time being able to interact with a very diverse list of hard-
ware drivers and software analysis libraries (see Design benefits section). It also means that Python
is the go-­ to language for the user’s creation of new Node behaviours. Yet the language that Heron
itself is implemented in (Python) does not enforce the language new Nodes can be implemented in
by Heron users. Heron offers users a comfortable starting point to implement their own Nodes (in
Python), while allowing for expert users to utilise lower-­ level languages that offer other advantages
like faster run times and lower-­ level control of a machine’s components (e.g. CPUs, GPUs, RAM,
etc.). Heron poses very few (if any) limitations in what types of behaviour can be implemented in
any Node. Breaking up the implementation into two levels of KG and running codes, as mentioned
above, confers a much-­ required ‘break complex problems into simpler ones’ functionality at the heart
of Heron’s operation.
Background
Computational graphs
Heron’s KG approach has its root in a number of software frameworks where experimental and data
analysis pipelines are constructed as a computational graph. MATLAB Simulink (Acklam, 2003) and
LabVIEW (Bitter and Nawrocki, 2006) are two of the more well-­ known frameworks where experi-
ments can be designed as computational graphs using predefined elements (i.e. nodes provided by
the developers of these systems). Bonsai (Lopes et al., 2015) is a new entry to this field originally
designed to ease the implementation of neuroscience and behavioural science experiments. The use
of directed acyclic graphs (Thulasiraman and Swamy, 1992) has increased dramatically in the Big
Data analytics tools where frameworks like Apache Airflow (Apache, 2015) and Dask (Rocklin, 2015)
allow parallelisation of algorithms and data queries over large clusters of machines. Two efforts that
are very similar to Heron in the way they structure computational graphs to define experimental pipe-
lines are EPypes (Semeniuta and Falkman, 2019) and the Robot Operating System (ROS) (Stanford
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, 2018). EPypes is (according to the developers’ own description)
a ‘Python-­ based software framework for developing vision algorithms in a form of computational
graphs and their integration with distributed systems based on publish-­ subscribe communication’.
The basic idea of message passing between individual processes, each responsible for its own algo-
rithm, running on different machines is identical to Heron (even at the level of using the publish–
subscribe communication protocol), although EPypes’s focus is on computer vision algorithms. The
exact same idea is utilised by ROS where (in their own words again) ‘The ROS runtime ‘graph’ is a
peer-­ to-­ peer network of processes (potentially distributed across machines) that are loosely coupled
using the ROS communication infrastructure. ROS implements several different styles of communica-
tion, including synchronous RPC-­ style communication over services, asynchronous streaming of data
over topics, and storage of data on a Parameter Server’.
Hybrid programming
Heron’s approach is based on an existing programming idea, that is combining both visual and
textual programming in a hybrid manner. One of the most widely used examples of such realisations
is VVVV (Holzer, 1998), a framework utilising visual programming with the C# or HLSL programming
languages for textual programming. This hybrid approach was found to allow for a better retention
of computer software university students, when comparing only textual or only visual styles in the
learning of programming (Noone and Mooney, 2018), showing that it better suits beginner level
programmers (a category into which a large percentage of experimentalists fall in).
Behavioural sciences toolboxes
Heron was originally conceptualised to be a framework for creating experiments in the fields of
behavioural sciences (e.g. neuroscience, experimental psychology, etc.) and although its philos-
ophy and use cases span a much wider spectrum, its current usage derives from experiments in this
field. Other frameworks that specifically target the same fields are pyControl (Akam et al., 2022),
Bpod (Sanworks LLC, USA) (building on the central design concept of B-­ control; Brody, 2007), andTools and resources﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿ Neuroscience
Dimitriadis et al. eLife 2024;13:RP91915. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.91915  6 of 29
Autopilot (Saunders and Wehr, 2019). Bpod and pyControl are software-­ dedicated hardware efforts,
while Autopilot is a software framework that, in the same spirit as EPypes, ROS and Heron, allows a
distributed experimental pipeline, albeit restricting the machines to Raspberry Pi computers. All three
efforts pay special attention to offering their users tools for creating state machines to define their
experiments (each utilising its own way of doing so). Heron currently allows the users to decide if their
pipeline would benefit from a state machine design or not, and being Python-­ based allows for the
use of a plethora of state machine tools in the Python ecosystem (Macedo, 2025; Sivji, 2020). This
includes the capability to script Nodes that can wrap the Python APIs of pyControl and Bpod (through
the Champalimaud Foundation’s pybpod API). This can be of interest to those experimentalists who
have invested in the respective hardware modules but would like to expand the capabilities of their
pipelines beyond the reach of pyControl or Bpod.
Design benefits
Self-documentation
The KG of Heron immediately offers a succinct overview of the experimental workflow and the
dynamics it implements, thus acting also as the primary documentation of the experiment. Armed
with a coherent picture of the experiment’s information flow over time, one can access the code of
individual Nodes, for a deeper understanding of its details. Grasping the meaning of a few hundred
lines of Python code that most Nodes require to be implemented, one Node at a time, is a much
more appealing proposition than opening up a whole code base of a non-­ Heron experiment and
being faced with thousands of lines of obscurely interconnected code arranged in a file system that
only makes sense to the developer (and only for a short while after the code’s implementation).
Moreover, Python code, in comparison to other lower-­ level languages, helps with readability in a self-­
documenting fashion (notwithstanding the plethora of in-­ code documentation tools in the Python
ecosystem). This self-­ documentation capability of Heron’s experimental implementations confers
obvious benefits to the exchange and reproducibility of experiments and minimises the possibility of
misunderstandings when researchers from different groups try to interact with the experiment.
Multiple machines, operating systems, and environments
In Heron, each Node runs its own process (practically its own little program, separate from all the
programs of the other Nodes). This multi-­ process approach offers an important competence; running
different Nodes on different machines (albeit by taking a hit on system resources vs a multi-­ threaded
approach). This is important since experiments should not be constrained by the Operating System
(OS) or the chip architecture that a small part of the experiment might require to run. For example,
a fast, high-­ resolution camera might have drivers only for Windows, while raspberry pi cameras can
be advantageous since they are easy to multiplex (due to the pi’s GPIO and low cost of a raspberry
pi with a camera) while online, million-parameter, deep learning algorithms will definitely not run on
anything other than high spec Linux machines. Heron removes the need to choose between these
capabilities since its Nodes (i.e. processes) can run on any machine connected to the main one that
runs Heron, through a Secure Shell Protocol (SSH) accessible network connection. When a KG is initi-
ated (i.e. a task is launched), Heron will connect to all the defined machines in the network and will
initialise whatever processes it has been directed to start at each of its predefined machines. While the
experiment is running, it will take care of message passing between machines, and when the Graph is
terminated, it will make sure all processes are also gracefully terminated. Since Heron uses standard
Python to implement most of its Nodes (something that users, as we mentioned above, do not have
to adhere to since functionality to work with other code bases exists – see the Rats playing computer
games: State machines and non-­ Python code Nodes example), a Heron experiment can be easily
defined on machines with different chip architectures, different OSes and different levels of virtualisa-
tion. The general rule is that if a machine with a certain configuration can run the scripts of Python (or
other non-­ Python code) that define the Nodes that need to run on that machine, then that script can
be part of a Heron experiment and have its Node’s inputs and outputs interact with Nodes running
on other machines, all set up through Heron’s GUI and with minimal user effort. Heron itself (the GUI
and underlying communication functionality) has been tested to be operational under Windows (10
and 11, both ×64), Linux PC (Ubuntu 20.04.6, ×64) MacOS, and Raspberry Pi 4 (Debian GNU/Linux
12 -bookworm-, aarch64).Tools and resources﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿ Neuroscience
Dimitriadis et al. eLife 2024;13:RP91915. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.91915  7 of 29
Python and the ease of implementing code
Finally, Python as an implementation language offers Heron another set of desirable (and some not so)
consequences. These include the standard pros and cons of Python versus other computer languages.
Apart from this, batteries included, Python’s approach to problems, the main advantage for exper-
iment implementation is Python’s extensive community of developers that have contributed to the
open source ecosystem of Python libraries for practically any computation imaginable. This extends to
drivers and control APIs for most hardware that an experimenter might require to use. From standard
data crunching algorithms to state-­ of-­ the-­ art machine learning ones and from serial communication
to drivers controlling high-­ spec equipment, there is very little that has not been covered by a Python
library. This wealth of ready-­ to-­ go solutions makes the two-­ tier approach of Heron (design the KG in
a GUI and implement the Nodes’ behaviour in Python) not just a viable but the preferred approach
for any experimental designer. Especially for those experimenters who may not be versed in the latest
nuances of low-­ level computer code, but still would like to be fully in control of the behaviour of their
experiment. For the cases where a user with deeper knowledge of software engineering has a specific
need to use other languages, Heron offers one last benefit arising from the use of its message passing
library, 0MQ (Hintjens, 2013). 0MQ is a versatile and easy to use library for passing messages across
different processes running on different machines. Most importantly, it includes bindings for almost
all commonly used languages. Utilising this library (with minimal effort), a user can create an applica-
tion in any language that communicates with a Heron Node (practically implementing a small part of
Heron’s protocol in another application). Then a Python wrapper Heron Node can be made respon-
sible for the executable’s lifetime. In this way, one has just created, with very little effort, a Node that
runs an executable written in some other language but acts just like any other Heron Node passing
data to and from any other Nodes.
Heron’s architecture
Node types
Heron defines three different types of Nodes, each implementing a different basic functionality of
message passing. Those are the Sources, the Transforms and the Sinks (see the orange, green, and
purple Nodes, respectively, in the example KG of Figure 1B). The Sources are Nodes that generate
data (either computationally or by reading them from a device) and thus can only transmit data through
the Nodes’ outputs. The Transform Nodes can both receive and transmit data through both input and
output points and are meant to allow data manipulation. Finally, the Sink Nodes can only receive data
and only feature input points. The Sink Nodes are designed to either save data or talk to devices that
require only computer input and not input from the external world (e.g. a motor). The Nodes’ types
only exist to generate a cleaner code base by separating the three types of message manipulation
(output only, input then output, and input only). There is nothing, though (except Python’s rule No 7:
Readability counts), stopping a user to create side effects of functions implemented by these Nodes
other than message passing, thus interacting with machines in ways different to how the Node’s type
would suggest.
Heron’s actor-based model
Most of Heron’s advantages over similar software tools stem from the way it structures the commu-
nication between the different Nodes (and thus processes underlying those). Heron’s processes do
not allow each other to take control of each other and change each other’s state. Each process has
full control of its state and will only allow another process to influence it through the passing of
messages. This is known as the actor-­ based model. In contrast, the most commonly used Object-­
Oriented Programming (OOP) model will allow an object to directly change the state of another.
For example, let us consider the situation where the result of an online analysis on incoming data
should be used to change a camera’s gain. In an OOP world, the object responsible for the anal-
ysis would also have to carry a pointer to the memory that represents the object responsible for
controlling the camera and directly change the gain (by changing the value of the instance’s gain
variable) when required. But what happens when another object is introduced later on that also
needs to control the gain of the same camera? What if the change of gain is also dependent on
the gain’s history? Who is responsible for correctly changing this parameter when there is more
than one object vying for control, and will the introduction of the new object require changing theTools and resources﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿ Neuroscience
Dimitriadis et al. eLife 2024;13:RP91915. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.91915  8 of 29
code on both the camera and the analysis object code bases? The actor-­ based model solves these
problems by allowing the camera’s gain to be changed only by the object that controls the camera
itself. All other objects can only request such a change by sending request messages to the camera
object (in Heron’s case the camera Node). In this way, when a user composes a Node, they have
to think only about what that Node does and how it communicates with other Nodes, and never
about the way code outside it might change its behaviour (which Heron with its actor-­ based model
will never allow).
Heron GUI’s multiple uses
To understand Heron’s code structure, one must initially appreciate its dual role in designing and
running an experiment. When a Graph (short for KG) is not running, Heron acts as a Graph designer,
offering a GUI where a user can create and delete Nodes, connect them with Links and assign
values to their parameters. During the design period, only one process is active, the one running
the Heron GUI (Editor, see Figure 2). When, on the other hand, a KG is running, the Heron process
stops being a Graph design application and assumes the role of a director in an actor-­ based model
(Agha, 1986). It can then concurrently compute and run a GUI for the experiment where the user
can update the parameters of the different Nodes on the fly (as an experimental Control Panel). In
this actor-­ based model, each Node is represented by two processes (Worker and Communication,
see Figure 2), while there are three more processes acting as message forwarders between all other
processes (Proof of life, Parameters and Data). That means a running experiment is constituted by
(Number of Nodes) × 2 + 4 processes (see Figure 2). Each process is an actor that can receive and
transmit messages, make local decisions (i.e. decisions that can affect only itself) and determine
how to respond to incoming messages. In the (most common) cases where the Nodes running
are all implemented by Python code, then the Heron process is responsible for initiating the three
forwarders and the com processes for all the Nodes. Each com process will then initiate the corre-
sponding worker process. In the special case (see Rats playing computer games: State machines
and non-­ Python code Nodes example) where a Node will call an executable instead of a Python
script, then the worker process can also be responsible for initialising (and terminating) the execut-
able’s process. As mentioned above, each Node is represented by two processes. In the code,
those are called the com and worker process. The worker process is the one that runs the Node’s
script defined by the user. The com process is responsible for (1) grabbing messages that come out
of other Nodes and are meant to reach the Node (as defined by a Link between two Nodes in the
Node Editor), (2) passing those messages to the worker process, (3) receiving any messages the
worker process has to pass to other Nodes, and (4) passing those messages to the com processes
of all the Nodes that should receive them. The passing of messages between com processes of
different Nodes is facilitated by the Data Forwarder process. The worker processes also communi-
cate directly with the Heron process through two separate forwarders. The Parameters forwarder
is responsible for passing to the worker processes the parameter values assigned by the user to
the processes’ respective Nodes on their GUI. This allows the user to also manipulate the state
of each Node while an experiment is running. Through this functionality, the Heron GUI becomes
(while a Graph is running) also a control centre through which an experimenter can interact with
the experiment by changing live the Nodes’ parameters. The Proof-­ of-­ life forwarder is responsible
for receiving an initial message from the worker process which is then passed to the GUI process,
letting it know the worker is up and running.
As mentioned above, Heron allows any of the Nodes in a Graph to be initiated and executed in
machines different to the one running the main Heron process. At the level of the processes, that
means that Heron, if instructed to run a Node on a different machine, will run only the worker process
of that Node on the different machine while its com process will run on the same machine as Heron.
That has as a drawback that a user cannot put multiple Nodes on a separate machine and expect
them to interact (through messages) within that machine since all message passing happens through
the com processes which will always run on the Heron running machine. Future versions of Heron
will address this limitation by allowing Heron to run Graphs headless (without the GUI process being
active), which will allow sub-­ Graphs to fully run on one machine and communicate their result to
Nodes in the machine running Heron.Tools and resources﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿ Neuroscience
Dimitriadis et al. eLife 2024;13:RP91915. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.91915  9 of 29
Figure 2. Heron’s design principles. (A) On the left, Heron’s Node structure showing the two processes that define a running Node and how messages
are passed between them. The design of the special message defined as ‘data’ is shown on the right. (B) Heron’s processes and message passing
diagram. Each rectangle represents a process. The top orange rectangle is the Heron’s Editor process, while the other three green rectangles are the
three Forwarders. The Proof-­ of-­ life forwarder deals with messages relating to whether a process has initialised correctly. The parameters forwarder deals
with messages that pass the different parameter values from the editor process (the Graphical User Interface [GUI]) to the individual Nodes. Finally,
the data forwarder deals with the passing of the data messages between the com processes of the Nodes. The squares represent the worker (top) and
com (bottom) process of three Nodes (a Source, a Transform, and a Sink from left to right). Solid arrows represent message passing between processes
using either the PUB SUB or the PUSH PULL type of sockets as defined in the 0MQ protocol. Dashed line arrows represent data passing within a single
process.Tools and resources﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿ Neuroscience
Dimitriadis et al. eLife 2024;13:RP91915. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.91915  10 of 29
Code architecture
Heron’s code is separated into three main folders, each pertaining to one of the three aspects of
its basic functionality (see Appendix 1—figure 1 for all of Heron’s folder structures). The Commu-
nications folder includes scripts that deal with the low-­ level communication between all Nodes that
make up a running Graph (experiment). The GUI folder holds scripts that deal with Heron’s GUI. The
Operations folder keeps all the code that defines all the Nodes that Heron recognises and can use to
create a Graph with. The Operations folder is further subdivided into the Source, Transform, and Sink
folders, each holding codes according to the type of the Node it implements. The Operations folder
also holds symbolic links to code repositories separate from Heron. Those, assuming a specific folder
structure, are recognised by Heron as valid Node describing codes. The scripts in the Communications
folder are class definitions for 8 objects: 6 for the worker and com objects for each Node type which
implement Heron’s communication protocol, one for the object that deals with the network connec-
tivity (SSHCom) and one re-­ implementing pyzmq’s (Python’s 0MQ bindings) Socket object, adding
to it the ability to pass numpy arrays and dictionaries as messages. This is required because in Heron
all messages are either numpy arrays or Python dictionaries. That means that the worker functions of
the worker scripts of the Source and Transform Nodes will always return either a list of numpy arrays
or a list of dictionaries. Each element of the list corresponds to one output of the Node. The Opera-
tions folder has three levels of subdivision. Immediately below it are the Source, Transform and Sink
folders, and inside those are folders representing groups of Nodes in each Node type (e.g. Vision
for Nodes that have to do with computer vision). Inside those subcategory folders are the folders
that hold the scripts for each Node (e.g. Camera which holds the scripts that read a web camera into
Heron). Inside each Node’s folder, there are a minimum of two scripts with name suffixes _com and
_worker. The _com script allows the user to define a Node’s characteristics (parameters, inputs and
outputs) with a few lines of code and without requiring any GUI relevant code (Heron takes care of
that). The _worker script is responsible for the functionality of the Node (being the script that is run
by the Node’s worker process through the node_type_worker object) and implements a minimum of
three functions. These are the initialisation, the worker and the end-­ of-­ life functions (the names are
arbitrary and the user can define them as they please). The initialisation function is run when a Node
is first started by Heron (i.e. its com process is up and running and its worker process has just started
but is being tested before it starts receiving and transmitting data). The worker function is the main
function that implements what the Node is supposed to do. The worker functions of the three types
of Nodes are implemented differently. In the case of a Source Node, the worker function needs to be
an infinite loop that somehow generates data and passes them on to the Node’s com process at the
end of every loop. The Transform and Sink Nodes need a worker function implemented as a callback
since their worker processes will call the worker function every time there is any data arriving at the
input of the Nodes (i.e. any time their com process has received a message from another com process
and has passed this to its worker process). Both the Transform and the Sink Nodes will stop accepting
messages until their worker functions have returned, and Heron is designed to have no message
buffering, thus automatically dropping any messages that come into a Node’s inputs while the Node’s
worker function is still running. Finally, the end-­ of-­ life function will be called when a worker process
hasn’t received a heartbeat signal from the source process for a pre-­ determined amount of time, and
its role is to gracefully terminate the process.
Usage
There are two skills that a user should possess in order to aptly use Heron. Firstly, one requires a famil-
iarity with Heron’s GUI which allows (1) downloading and installing new Nodes from existing reposi-
tories, (2) defining a local network of computers on which the different Nodes can run, (3) setting up
a pipeline using the existing Nodes, and (4) running the pipeline all the while being comfortable in
debugging it as problems arise. The second skill is the implementation of new Nodes based on the
user’s individual needs. In this section, we will provide a basic description of both the GUI usage and
the development of new Nodes.Tools and resources﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿ Neuroscience
Dimitriadis et al. eLife 2024;13:RP91915. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.91915  11 of 29
Using Heron’s GUI
Adding new Nodes from pre-existing code
Heron comes pre-­ packaged with a small set of Nodes that have a generic enough usage that most
users would find useful. An important point though about Heron is that every user will be developing
their own Nodes, which in most cases will take the form of code shared in some online repository.
Heron is designed to easily access repos that have been developed following a specific file structure
to represent a set of Heron Nodes and integrate them into its GUI and workflow without the user
needing to do anything else other than create/download the repository and point Heron to it. This
also simplifies the further development of Nodes by the community of users since a new Node repos-
itory does not have to interact with the main repository of Heron and thus avoids all the pitfalls of
pushing, pulling, and merging code repositories at different levels of maturity.
Local network
Heron’s GUI allows an easy definition of the local access network (LAN) of machines that will run
Nodes forming a single pipeline. A user has only to provide the IP, port, user name, and password of
a machine in the LAN, and Heron will communicate between machines using an SSH protocol, taking
care of issues like process lifecycle on different machines, opening and closing ports and proper
passing of messaging between processes over the network.
Setting up a pipeline
Once all the Nodes’ repositories have been made known to Heron and the LAN of all machines has
been set up, a user needs to implement the experiment’s pipeline. This is achieved again graphi-
cally by introducing the required Nodes in the Node Editor (main window of Heron), setting up their
parameter values and finally connecting the Nodes together by creating links between outputs and
inputs. Heron allows many-­ to-­ many connectivity, meaning a Node’s output can connect to any number
of inputs and an input can receive any number of outputs.
Running a pipeline
Once a pipeline has been defined (generating the KG of the experiment), then running it is achieved
by pressing the Start Graph button of Heron. Heron will go through each Node (in order of addition
to the Node Editor) and will start the processes that the Node represents (see Heron’s Architecture for
more details). It will then connect all the processes with 0MQ sockets as defined by the links between
the Nodes and pass the Nodes’ parameters to the worker process of each Node. The pipeline of data
being generated by the Source Nodes, being transformed by the Transform Nodes and finally saved
or turned into control of machines by the Sink Nodes will keep on running until the user presses the
End Graph button. At this point, Heron will gracefully terminate all processes (including the ones
running on separate machines) and close down all communication sockets.
Creating a new Node
Heron users will develop their own Nodes for their specific experiments. To facilitate this, Heron
provides a series of tools. Firstly, there is a set of templates that offer a scaffold on top of which a user
can build their own code. The templates have the required code elements that all valid Heron Nodes
must possess and are fully documented to help a user quickly build functioning Nodes. An abbrevi-
ated and annotated Transform template for the com and worker scripts can be seen in Appendix 2.
On top of Node templates, Heron provides a GUI-­ based system for generating new Nodes. This will
create the required files and all the common between Nodes, skeleton code, appropriate to the type
of Node under development and using names (for functions and variables) chosen by the user during
the GUI-­ based creation process. Finally, in order to expedite the correct placement of new Nodes in
pipelines, Heron offers a Node (User Defined Function 1I 1O) designed to allow Python functions to
be run as Nodes in Heron (without the user having to follow Heron’s API). This Node can be used to
simulate inputs and outputs to an under-­ development Node in order to test and debug its function-
ality before incorporating it into a full pipeline.
Node repositories
As described above, Heron offers the tools to integrate any new code (designed with the correct
file structure) into its collection of Nodes and make it available in its GUI. Although not necessary,Tools and resources﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿ Neuroscience
Dimitriadis et al. eLife 2024;13:RP91915. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.91915  12 of 29
good practice would be to develop any new Node (or closely related group of Nodes) as part of a
separate repository so that the Node can be easily shared with the rest of the community. Currently,
a public GitHub organisation called (rather unimaginatively) Heron-Repositories is hosting both the
main Heron Git repository and all other Git repositories of Nodes developed to cover the developers’
experimental needs. Any of the individual Heron Nodes repositories can serve as an easy-­ to-­ follow
example on the file structure expected by Heron for successful integration of new code. All of the
Nodes presented in the Results paragraphs examples can be found in this repository.
Discussion
We have presented Heron, a new tool for coding up experimental pipelines. We have put forward
the proposition that using Heron instead of the many other frameworks that one can utilise to create
software to run experiments has a series of advantages. It can practically self-­ document, creating KG
that are as close as possible to one’s mental schema of the experiment. These KGs and code bases
are easy to follow by researchers other than the developers of the experiment, irrespective of the
complexity of the experiment. They can trivially connect processes that run on different operating
systems and machines in a single, unified pipeline. For example, a series of raspberry pi computers,
each reading some cameras or other sensors, can connect and pass the data to a Linux-based, many
GPU machine that does online machine learning analysis, while these results can pass to a PC machine
running a computer game controlled by those results. It is using a language (Python) for the devel-
opment of experiments that is one of the easiest and most versatile computer languages with a large
community of developers and rich libraries for most functionalities. Finally, it is versatile enough to
allow easy integration of code bases written with languages other than the one it has been devel-
oped in. We are arguing here that Heron’s learning curve, starting from a basic capability in Python,
is measured in the few hours of trying to create a couple of new Nodes and joining those together in
order to create some toy experiment. Once that is understood, then the limit to what can be achieved
is defined by the level of Python knowledge of the developer. Heron has been conceptualised to
grow into a community project. Both itself and the repositories holding extra Heron Nodes are open
source under an MIT licence. The separation of repositories that hold the main Heron code and the
individual Nodes’ code bases allows for the growth of a Node ecosystem where users will be able
to share their development using standard repository-­ based tools. Finally, the developers welcome
efforts for collaboration with the aim for Heron to eventually become a multi-­ developer, collaborative
project expanding with capabilities covering the needs of experimental scientists in all experimental
fields and beyond.
Materials and methods
Here, we showcase a number of experiments implemented in Heron. Each example has been chosen
to highlight one of Heron’s competences as described in the Design benefits. As mentioned above,
all the Nodes used to construct the examples presented here can be found in the Heron-­ Repositories
GitHub organisation. We are not making public the specific experiment files since these are hard-
ware specific and would need large changes to be made compatible to any other hardware. But
Heron’s graphical nature makes it easy to go from an image capture of an experiment’s Heron GUI
(see Figures 3–5) to a working experiment by simply combining the required Nodes.
Probabilistic reversal learning. Implementation as self-documentation
The first experimental example is provided here to showcase how Heron’s implementation of an
experiment becomes the easiest way for non-­ developers to acquaint themselves with the experiment
and its logic. Thus, here we describe the implementation from the point of view of someone who sees
it for the first time and is trying to understand what the experiment is (without accessing any other
publication or written explanation). As seen in Figure 3, this experimental pipeline is made up of
four Nodes. One is called a ‘KeyPress’, which since it connects to an input named ‘Start/Previous Trial
Result’ seems to play the role of the start button of the experiment. The last Node is a ‘Save Pandas
DF’ which suggests saving the output of the third Node (the ‘Trial Controller’) in a row of a pandas
DataFrame. The main experiment seems to be defined by two Nodes, one named ‘Trial Generator’
and one named ‘Trial Controller’. We can immediately conceptualise the pipeline as a two-­ part one,Tools and resources﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿ Neuroscience
Dimitriadis et al. eLife 2024;13:RP91915. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.91915  13 of 29
where the first part generates some kind of trial state which it then outputs as its ‘Trial Definition’
output to the second Node which inputs that ‘Trial Definition’ and runs (Controls) that trial given its
state. We notice that these two Nodes are reciprocally connected, meaning that the ‘Trial Generator’
requires the output of the ‘Trial Controller’ (named ‘Trial History’) to generate the definition of the
next trial. Looking a bit more closely at the names of the parameters of the Nodes, we can deduce
a number of things about the experiment’s structure and function. From the Trial Generator param-
eters, we see that trials seem to fall into two blocks. We can also see that the experiment has trials
with four types of Stim (maybe short for Stimulation, or Stimuli). We can assume (but would need
to verify from the code) that the Reward Block Contingencies mentioned for the two Blocks are the
probabilities of a reward given the type of Stimulation. So, we have surmised that the trials come
into blocks of specific length (probably a random variable drawn from some distribution from the
user-­ provided Blocks Length Range parameter) and of specific trial type (one of four), and each trial
type in each block has a user-­ defined reward probability. So far so intelligible. By looking at the Trial
Controller Node’s parameters, we see first of all that the Node requires a COM Port and Baud Rate
to be defined, showing that it is controlling some device through a serial port. The ‘Reward Only
After Lick’ parameter tells us that this is an experiment where the subject needs to lick (and in some
cases this is the only way to get a reward). The names of the rest of the parameters indicate that the
experiment is an olfactory one (see ‘Odour Window’) where the subject gets to experience an odour
Figure 3. The Knowledge Graph of the Probabilistic Reversal Learning experiment. (A) The Knowledge Graph of the Probabilistic Reversal Learning
experiment showing four Nodes comprising the task, two of which (Trial Generator and Trial Controller) are connected in a loop (the output of one is fed
into the input of the other). (B) The schematic or mental schema of the experiment. Notice the direct correspondence (i, ii) between the Heron Nodes
and the two main components of the experiment’s mental schema, as well as the Node’s parameters and the schema components’ basic variables.
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 3:
Figure supplement 1. The Probabilistic Reversal Learning experiment.Tools and resources﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿ Neuroscience
Dimitriadis et al. eLife 2024;13:RP91915. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.91915  14 of 29
Figure 4. The Knowledge Graph of the Fetching the cotton bud experiment. The coloured circles at the bottom middle of each Node and the coloured
star and square (where shown) are not part of the Heron Graphical User Interface (GUI) but are used in the figure to indicate in which Machine/OS/
Python configuration each Node is running its worker script (circles) and which visualisation image at the bottom corresponds to which Node. For the
circle, the colour code is: White = PC/Windows 11/Python 3.9, Red = PC/Windows 11/Python 3.8, Blue = Nvidia Jetson Nano/Ubuntu Linux/Python 3.9,
Green = PC/Ubuntu Linux in WSL/Python 3.9. The two smaller windows below Heron’s GUI are visualisations created by the two Visualiser Nodes. The
right visualisation (coming from Node Visualiser##1) is the output of the Detectron2 algorithm showing how well it is detecting the whole cotton bud
(detection box 0) and the cotton bud’s tips (detection boxes 3). The left visualisation box (output of the Visualiser##0 Node) is showing the angle of the
cotton bud (in an arbitrary frame of reference where the 0 degrees would be almost horizontal on the screen and the 90 almost vertical). This angle is
calculated in the TL Cottonbud Angle Node, which is responsible for running the deep learning algorithm and using its inference results to calculate
the angle of the cotton bud. As shown, the TL Cottonbud Angle Node is running on a Linux virtual machine (since Detectron 2 cannot run on Windows
machines).
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 4:
Figure supplement 1. Fetching the cotton bud experiment as controlled by Heron.Tools and resources﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿ Neuroscience
Dimitriadis et al. eLife 2024;13:RP91915. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.91915  15 of 29
Figure 5. Computer game for rats. (A) The experimental design (see Figure 5—figure supplement 1 for a
detailed explanation). (B) The Heron Knowledge Graph. (C) An overview of some of the hardware connectivity of
the experimental setup and the way Heron deals with the time alignment of the data packets from different Nodes.
The green rectangle to the right shows how one can use Heron’s data recording facilities to correlate the frames of
Figure 5 continued on next pageTools and resources﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿ Neuroscience
Dimitriadis et al. eLife 2024;13:RP91915. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.91915  16 of 29
(maybe one of the four stimulations described in the Trial Generator), then gets a pre-­ response delay,
then a response window time and finally a reward window. In order to get a better picture of what the
experiment is actually doing, we next look at the code. But most importantly, we know exactly where
in the code base we should be looking without needing to search through tens of files to follow an
obscure logic to figure out where the bits of the code that implement the actual logic are. There are
two Nodes of interest, so we should, as a first step, look at the worker scripts of those two Nodes.
The Trial Generator is an undaunting 127 lines of code, while the Trial Controller is 251 (empty lines
included). Yet we can zoom even more in where we should initially look by simply ignoring the initial-
isation and end_of_life functions and just concentrate on the worker_function of each script. Those
two functions are shown in the Worker_function Code in Appendix 3. We need only two pieces of
prior knowledge to understand the code. One is that the worker functions of the Transform (and Sink)
Nodes are callbacks that are called every time the Node receives a message to any of its inputs. Both
the Trial Generator and the Trial Controller are Transforms (they have both inputs and outputs and are
marked as green on the GUI). The second is that each Node outputs through the return statement of
its worker function a list of numpy arrays with each element of the list being the array that is outputted
by a specific output of the Node (in order from left to right in the list corresponding from top to
bottom in the Node). So, a Node with two outputs will have a worker function that returns a list with
two numpy arrays/dictionaries. In this case, for example, the Trial Controller’s worker function should
return a list with two arrays, i.e. the Trial Result output and the Trial History one. With this in mind and
looking at the Trial Generator, we can see that it takes in the previous trial’s stimulation number and, if
the correct port was licked, uses this information to keep a running track of the correct licks for each
port, decide which block we currently are in, decide which stimulation to generate next and offer or
not a reward. By following the Trial Controller worker_function’s code, we can easily validate our prior
speculation about the temporal structure of a single trial following a path of delays interspersed with
stimulation and potential reward. An overview of the actual experiment running on Heron, also show-
casing how Heron communicates with the Arduino board that does the hardware control, can also
be seen in Figure 3—figure supplement 1, together with a schematic of the experimental timeline.
Fetching. Four environments, three operating systems, two machines,
one pipeline
This next experiment showcases Heron’s ability to run Nodes whose worker process runs on machines
separate from the one running the Heron GUI. The experiment itself requires the monitoring of a
rodent as it tries to fetch a cotton bud from a random point in a large arena and drop it into a
shallow pot under a hole at one of its corners. The hardware setup has a Grasshopper3 USB 3.0 colour
camera (GS3-­ U3-­ 23S6C-­ C, FLIR) which records the whole of the arena from the top at 120 frames per
second with HD resolution, while 4 smaller, black and white, 30 frames per second cameras (OV9281,
ArduCam) are used to capture the animal from three different angles and to also monitor the target
pot from underneath (since its base is transparent plastic) using the fourth camera. The experiment
needs to also know when the animal has deposited the cotton bud and also record at which angle
this has happened. When the animal has deposited the cotton bud, it is rewarded with a treat from a
nearby reward port. The pot rotates, removing the cotton bud from the arena (while another, empty
pot takes its place), and the cotton bud is thrown back into the arena for the animal to fetch again.
The Grasshopper camera at the time of the experiment’s development could run only on Python 3.8.
The four smaller cameras are part of a system that synchronises them, providing a stitched up single
the Spinnaker Camera saved video (the example here highlights the last frame #216244) with the video frames of
the Arducam cameras (#54071 in this example) which are generated and saved by a separate Node running on a
different machine. (D) The Unity project used to create the visuals and their reactions to the commands sent by the
TL Experiment Phase 2v2##0, logic Node. (E) A zoom of the parameters of the two logic Nodes in the experiment
(TL Experiment Phase2v2##0 and TL Poke Controller##0). Updating those parameters during an experiment, an
experimenter can control the way the arena interacts with the subject and allows Heron’s Graphical User Interface
(GUI) to act as a control panel for the experiment while a Graph is running.
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 5:
Figure supplement 1. Heron running the ‘computer game for rats’ experiment.
Figure 5 continuedTools and resources﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿ Neuroscience
Dimitriadis et al. eLife 2024;13:RP91915. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.91915  17 of 29
frame of 5120 × 800 pixels resolution, (ArduCam 1MP*4 Quadrascopic Monochrome Camera Kit)
which can run only on either a Raspberry Pi (≥3) (Raspberry Pi Foundation), a Jetson Nano (Nvidia) or
a Xavier (Nvidia) single board computers. The angle detection of the cotton bud when it is in the pot
is done using Meta’s Detectron 2 (Wu et al., 2019), a deep learning algorithm which we trained with
a few hundred samples to detect the cotton bud’s edges when in the pot using as an input the part
of the OV9281 camera frames that come from the camera underneath the pot. Detectron 2 requires
an Intel or AMD CPU-­ based computer running Linux. Heron itself and all the other Nodes for this
experiment run on a Windows PC with Python 3.9. The choice to run the Heron GUI on the Windows
machine was made to keep the latency of the 120 fps camera to a minimum. So, the experimental
pipeline needs the following Machine/OS/Python configurations: Intel/Windows/Python 3.9+, Intel/
Windows/Python 3.8, Intel/Linux/Python 3.9+, and ARM/Linux/Python 3.9+. To create all the above
configurations, we first made in the main Windows 11 machine (that Heron runs on in a Python 3.9
environment) a separate (conda) environment with Python 3.8 and the required Spinnaker (for the Flir
camera) python package. Then we set up on the same machine a Windows Linux Subsystem (WLS
2) virtual machine, running Ubuntu and Python 3.9 with all the required packages to run Detectron
2. Finally, we connected the Windows machine through an LAN to an NVIDIA Jetson Nano with the
Arducam Quadrascopic system running Ubuntu and Python 3.9 with all the packages for the Arducam
system to operate. To summarise, the pipeline (which can be seen in Figure 4) when run, is utilising
two physically separate machines, three operating systems (one Windows 11 and two Linux, one on a
virtual machine) and four different Python environments. Once each machine/OS/Python environment
is up and running and each one can run the Node(s) that it is supposed to run by itself (something that
can be tested and debugged at the level of an individual Node without requiring the whole pipeline to
be up and running), then assembling the pipeline is as simple as connecting the Nodes appropriately
on Heron’s Node Editor and telling each one (through the Node’s secondary parameters window).
Which computer it should run on and which Python executable it should call to run the worker script.
Heron hides from the user all of the work required for the different processes in all the machines to
start at the right time, connect correctly to each other, exchange data while the pipeline is running and
finally gracefully stop when the pipeline stops without leaving hanging processes and inaccessible bits
of memory all over the place. An overview of which machine runs what Node can be seen in Figure 4
while Figure 4—figure supplement 1 shows a snapshot of an animal having fetched a cotton bud
while its angle is being live detected by one of the Detectron 2 algorithms.
Rats playing computer games
The rats playing computer games experiment teaches a rat to rotate a line on a screen using a left
and a right lever press to hit a target line and avoid a trap line. It presents a rat with a nose poke
hole, two levers (left and right to the hole) and two screens to the animal’s front and right, when it is
poking. At the final stage of training, the animal should be able to first nose poke, look at the screen
at a set of jagged lines and press one of the two levers to make one of the lines rotate towards the
correct line (target) and away from the wrong one (trap). Once this has been achieved, the jagged
lines disappear and a separate visual cue appears (usually animated) letting the animal know that there
is reward in the reward port (see Figure 5—figure supplement 1). This is a very challenging behaviour
for a rat, and the experiment needs several stages of shaping to teach it to the animals. Each stage
of shaping towards the final behaviour requires a set of different visual stimuli and a different set of
states in a rather large state machine. Also, at the conception of the experiment, there was no prior
experience on the ideal path to the final behaviour, so a very malleable stimulus generation technique
and state machine development was required in order for a large number of ideas to be tested in a
small amount of time. Because of the above, this experiment is ideal in showcasing a series of Heron’s
capabilities. These are Heron’s ability to work with non-­ Python code, Heron’s workload management,
the tools Heron provides to keep track of complicated experiments and record all required informa-
tion and finally Heron GUI’s capability to act not just as a Graph designer but also as a control panel
while a Graph is running.
State machines and non-Python code Nodes
As mentioned above, although Heron’s code base for Node development is in Python, it is relatively
easy to create Nodes with code bases on different languages. One way to do this, (which is the wayTools and resources﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿ Neuroscience
Dimitriadis et al. eLife 2024;13:RP91915. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.91915  18 of 29
most scientific computing Python libraries are using), is to use Python interop technologies which
allow functions written in other languages (most commonly languages of the C family) to be called by
Python. Although this is very powerful, it is a painstaking task, can be very time consuming, and usually
requires significant experience with both Python and whatever other language one is working with.
Another, not as a low-­ level approach, offering less control but faster implementation times, is the use
of the 0MQ library to pass messages between a Heron Node and an executable written in another
language (what Heron is doing to connect all of the Nodes of a pipeline but with a significantly toned-­
down communication protocol). Here we took the second route. In the Unity game engine (Unity Tech-
nologies, US) we made a simple 2D game using C# code, that covered all the possible visual stimuli we
needed to show to the animals at any stage (see Figure 5D for a snapshot of the Unity development
environment). Instead of using the standard game inputs (e.g. keyboard or game controller) to control
what and when was played on the screen, we used a string of commands that was received by the
game executable through a 0MQ SUB socket (using NetMQ, one of many C# 0MQ bindings). The
Unity-­ generated executable was also designed to do a handshake through a PUSH PULL socket with
whatever process initiated it. This made sure the initialising process knew if anything was wrong and
also was able to send some initialisation messages. Once the game executable was ready, we created
a standard Heron Sink Node whose initialisation function would start the executable, handshake with
it and send it the Node’s parameters (e.g. if the game was meant to show its stimuli on one or two
screens). Then its worker function would just pass to the correct socket any string that would be
received at its input from the other Heron Nodes. Properly formatted strings would be understood by
the game and update its state accordingly. The Node’s end_of_life function would finally close down
the executable when Heron’s KG was terminated. This use of process control done not directly from
the main Heron process but from a Node’s worker process is compatible with the concept of Heron as
an actor-­ based framework where an actor (a Node’s worker process) can also initialise and end other
actors (in this case the Unity executable). Regarding the state machines used in this experiment, we
found that no matter how large and complicated a state machine gets, the difficulty lies in its initial
design and not in its implementation. Here, we used statemachine (Macedo, 2025), a Python library
that allows the definition of a state machine and its individual states with easily attachable callbacks
at state transitions.
CPU load
Using multiple processes rather than multiple threads does incur a hit in the total CPU load Heron will
require in order to execute a Graph. The ‘Rats playing computer games’ experiment, with a 15 node
Graph (the largest one we had ever had to execute over multiple experiments implemented in Heron)
offers a good test bed to showcase Heron’s CPU requirements. The experiment was conducted on
a Windows 10 × 64 machine with an 8 core i7-­ 7700K CPU clocking at 4.20 GHz. The Graph runs an
acquisition and save of a 120-­ fps 576 × 676 pixels video, an acquisition and save of a 20-­ kHz, 5-­ channel
DAQ trace updated at 10 Hz, a Unity game running concurrently on two HD screens updating at
120 Hz and an acquisition and save of a 30-­ fps 5460 × 800 pixels video running on the Jetson Nano
machine. When the computer was idle, it showed a base CPU load of just around 10–15%. When
Heron was up but not running a KG, it consumed about 2–5% of the CPU for a total load of 15–20%.
With the above experiment running, the CPU load hit 100% with the Unity game requiring around
24% and the remaining 45–55% used by the Graph’s 32 processes (one process was running on an
NVIDIA Jetson Nano machine). The above numbers, though, are true if the operating system was
allowed to assign CPU cores to the different Heron operations as it saw fit. Heron has a feature which
allows the user to force the operating system to keep a worker process running on a specific CPU
core. Rerunning the above Graph while setting 10 of the 15 worker processes to specific CPUs and
allowing the system to optimise the load for only 5 of them (the Spinnaker Camera, Save FFMPEG
Video, Arducam Quadrascopic Camera, Save Array To Binary, and TL Taks2 Screens Unity) dropped
the total CPU load to 80%, again with the Unity game consuming around 24% while all Graph python
processes consuming around 25%. The above specifications show that Heron is capable of running
Graphs with heavy acquisition and save loads. Also, Heron’s ability to utilise multiple machines in a
single Graph means that processes requiring exceptional CPU, memory and/or GPU loads can be
offloaded to machines other than the one running the Heron GUI. In the above example, this is the
case with the acquisition and save of the Arducam video. Also, before implementing the CPU settingTools and resources﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿ Neuroscience
Dimitriadis et al. eLife 2024;13:RP91915. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.91915  19 of 29
feature, we used to run the Unity game on a 3rd machine in order to keep the 24% CPU load require-
ment out of the main Heron machine. We stopped using this 3rd machine once the CPU setting
feature was in place, and the transition from three to two machines required only a single line change
in the Node’s secondary window to indicate where the worker script was to be found.
Synchronisation (time alignment)
Multiple processes, running over different machines, can become extremely difficult to synchronise,
especially to the tight requirements of a scientific experiment. Heron offers a set of tools to allow users
to time-­ align every single packet of data generated and saved by any Node to any other packet irre-
spective of whether the packets were generated by Nodes on the same or separate machines. Here
we use the ‘Rats playing computer games’ experiment to showcase how such time alignment would
be achieved between a few of the experiment’s Nodes.
More specifically, the experiment has two separate video captures which, since they happen on
different machines, can only be synchronised through an external clock. This is similar to an electro-
physiology data acquisition system whose data points can be synchronised to other data sets (e.g
videos, or button presses), only by an external clock (a TTL pulse generator usually) that is simultane-
ously recorded by all devices. The whole setup is shown diagrammatically in Figure 5C.
We use a 120-­ fps projector (whose output is controlled by the Node TL Projector Output##0) to
act as our base clock. By pressing a key after the Graph has started running, a part of the projector’s
output (depicted as a screen in Figure 5C) turns blue and thus stimulates a blue sensitive photodiode.
This happens at every frame, thus the photodiode generates a 120-­ Hz TTL pulse train timed to the
onset of the blue pass of the projector. That train starts when the key is pressed and stops when it
is pressed a second time (thus demarcating the start and stop of the recording part of the session).
The photodiode’s TTL pulse acts as an external trigger to the Spinnaker (FLIR) camera whose output
is being captured by Heron’s Spinnaker Camera##0 Node. The same pulse is also fed to a National
Instruments USB Data Acquisition System (NIDAQ) and to an Arduino. The NIDAQ is being captured
(at 10 packets of 2000 points each per second) by Heron’s NIDAQ Analog Volt In##0 Node. The
Arduino runs a small loop that generates a second TTL pulse for every four TTL pulses coming in from
the Spinnaker camera (thus creating a 30-­ Hz TTL train). This TTL train is fed as an external trigger to
the four cameras of the Arducam system as well as to the GPIO of the Jetson Nano machine that is
running the Heron Node which captures the Arducam’s video frames output (Arducam Quadrascopic
Camera ##0). The Arducam system generates a TTL pulse every time the global shutters of the four
cameras fire, and that is fed into the same NIDAQ as the Spinnaker TTL pulse out (see left column of
Figure 5C).
The Spinnaker camera at every trigger generates not only a frame but also the frame’s id. This is
captured by Heron’s Spinnaker Node’s Worker process and saved to its Substate dataframe together
with the equivalent id of the Node’s data packet and the timestamp of this (see Figure 5C ‘Spinnaker
Camera Worker Process Data’ table). A Substate dataframe is Heron’s way to allow the designer of a
Node to save information (to a pandas dataframe) every time the Worker process runs a pass through
its loop. This is done through Heron’s API, requiring only a single line of code with the information to
be saved to the dataframe.
Any failures of the Node to capture a frame get registered in this correlation between camera ids
and packet ids. The Spinnaker Node sends the captured frame to the SaveFFMPEGvideo##0 where
an ffmpeg pipeline saves each frame to a video stream. As mentioned before, Heron does not offer
any capability to buffer packets, so if the FFMPEG Node is too late to save any frame, then the next
one gets lost. Heron records this in the FFMPEG Node’s Com process log file. A Com processes
log file (optionally set for any Node by filling in the log file’s path to the Node’s secondary window
appropriate entry) records the id of any packet that arrives from an upstream Node as given by that
Node and the id of that packet as given by the current Node. In this way, any dropped packets are
registered, and a one-­ to-­ one equivalence between packets sent and packets received can always be
established. In this case, the FFMPEG Node’s Com process log file indicates the id of each packet
that has left the Spinnaker Node and arrived in the FFMPEG Node and the id assigned to it by the
FFMPEG Node. The id of the FFMPEG Node corresponds to the frame id of the video generated by
the ffmpeg pipeline in the Node. In this way, we can now correlate any frame of the produced video to
the id of that frame generated by the Spinnaker camera, despite some dropped frames in the process.Tools and resources﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿ Neuroscience
Dimitriadis et al. eLife 2024;13:RP91915. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.91915  20 of 29
In the shown example, the camera generated a total of 216300 frames, and the final video had a total
of 216,244 frames, a drop of 56 frames dropped over the two Nodes, that is a 0.02%.
At the same time, the Arducam system (triggered by the sub-­ sampled TTL pulse from the Spin-
naker camera) generates frames at a rate of 30 fps. These are captured and saved by the Arducam
Node running on the Jetson Nano. The Node is also registering (for every incoming frame) the equiv-
alent id of the TTL pulse that generated that frame by also reading the Jetson Nano’s GPIO port. In
this way, the Arducam Node’s Worker process can generate a Substate dataframe that correlates the
packet’s id as given by the process (and thus the id of the video’s frame) with the TTL pulse id that
produced that frame.
In order to now correlate the frames of the Arducam video with those of the Spinnaker video, we
use the saved TTL pulses from the NIDAQ instrument as saved by the Heron NIDAQ Node. The id
of the frame captured by the Spinnaker camera corresponds to the number of the pulse in the Spin-
naker pulse train, and the id of the pulse saved in the Jetson Nano’s GPIO port corresponds to the
number of the pulse in the Arducam pulse train. By knowing which Spinnaker pulse has generated
which Arducam pulse, one can work backwards through the above described correlations all the way
to knowing which frame in the Spinnaker video corresponds to which frame in the Arducam one,
despite those being captured on different devices and some frames getting lost by Heron’s ‘dropping
of packets’ architecture. In Figure 5C, we show more specifically how the last pulses of the TTL trains
in the NIDAQ can be used to trace the correspondence between the last frames in the videos of the
Spinnaker and Arducam systems using Heron’s Substate dataframes and log files.
On-the-fly experimental control
As mentioned above, the ‘Rats playing computer games’ experiment is a rather demanding task that
requires slow and careful shaping on the subjects’ behaviour. Certain parts of the training could not
be automated (especially when we were trying ideas that we did not know if they were relevant to
the final shaping protocol). During those sessions, the experimenter had to change a number of the
experiment’s parameters on the fly as the subjects produced behaviour, given both how well they
were doing and how the experimenter perceived certain aspects of their behaviour that were too
hard to quantify (and thus use in an automated system). Examples of these experimental parameters
were the number of reward pellets offered to the subjects, the maximum angle between the moving
line and the target line and the speed of the moving line (and thus the amount of time required for
a lever to be kept pressed), the amount of time the reward was available after a successful trial and
whether the levers would vibrate or not when pressed correctly, etc. (see Figure 5E). Heron allowed us
to operate in this ‘experimenter in the loop’ fashion because it allows the Worker process of any Node
to update its parameters as they are changed by the experimenter through the GUI while the Graph is
running. Which parameters are capable of online updating is up to the author of the Node, and Heron
allows both updatable and non-­ updatable parameters (which are easily defined in the Worker process
code through Heron’s API).
Documentation and repositories
The code for all repositories used in this report can be found at the Heron GitHub (Dimitriadis, 2025),
while Heron’s documentation is hosted at Herton docs. Heron’s name is a tribute to one of the first
known creators of automata, Hero of Alexandria.
Ethical approval and animal details
Ethical approval
All experiments were performed in accordance with the UK Home Office regulations Animal (Scientific
Procedures) Act 1986 and the Animal Welfare and Ethical Review Body (AWERB).
Animal details
For the Fetching and Computer Games experiments, subjects were adult male Lister Hooded rats
(Charles River), which were kept on a reversed 12-­ hr light–dark cycle. Rats were food-­ restricted and
received chocolate pellet reward while performing the behavioural task. A total of 10 were used in the
behavioural experiments. Mouse experiments for the Probabilistic Reversal Learning experiment were
conducted using male WT C57/BL6 (Charles River), aged at 6–8 weeks at the start of experiments.Tools and resources﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿ Neuroscience
Dimitriadis et al. eLife 2024;13:RP91915. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.91915  21 of 29
Mice were housed in cages of two to four animals under a 12-­ hr light/dark cycle. Mice had ad libitum
access to food, but were water restricted to 85% of base weight during behavioural training and
received water rewards in the experiment. A total of four mice were used.
Additional information
Competing interests
Athena Akrami: Reviewing editor, eLife. The other authors declare that no competing interests exist.
Funding
Funder Grant reference number Author
Gatsby Charitable
Foundation
GAT3755 George Dimitriadis
Athena Akrami
Wellcome Trust 219627/Z/19/Z George Dimitriadis
Athena Akrami
The funders had no role in study design, data collection, and interpretation, or the
decision to submit the work for publication. For the purpose of Open Access, the
authors have applied a CC BY public copyright license to any Author Accepted
Manuscript version arising from this submission.
Author contributions
George Dimitriadis, Conceptualization, Software, Methodology, Writing – original draft, Writing –
review and editing, Project administration, Validation; Ella Svahn, Validation; Andrew F MacAskill,
Resources; Athena Akrami, Resources, Supervision
Author ORCIDs
George Dimitriadis ‍ ‍https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1419-1173
Ella Svahn ‍ ‍http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1976-1531
Andrew F MacAskill ‍ ‍https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0196-3779
Athena Akrami ‍ ‍https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5711-0903
Ethics
All experiments were performed in accordance with the UK Home Office regulations Animal (Scientific
Procedures) Act 1986 and the Animal Welfare and Ethical Review Body (AWERB). For the Fetching
and Computer Games experiments subjects were adult male Lister Hooded rats, which were kept
on a reversed 12-­ hr light–dark cycle. Rats were food-­ restricted and received chocolate pellet reward
while performing the behavioural task. A total of 10 were used in the behavioural experiments. Mouse
experiments for Probabilistic Reversal Learning experiment were conducted using male WT C57/BL6
(Charles River), aged at 6–8 weeks at the start of experiments. Mice were housed in cages of two
to four animals under a 12-­ hr light/dark cycle. Mice had ad libitum access to food, but were water
restricted to 85% of base weight during behavioural training and received water rewards in the exper-
iment. A total of four mice were used.
Peer review material
Reviewer #2 (Public review): https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.91915.3.sa1
Author response https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.91915.3.sa2
Additional files
Supplementary files
MDAR checklist
Data availability
No data were generated. All code is open source and available on GitHub (https://github.com/​
Heron-Repositories).Tools and resources﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿ Neuroscience
Dimitriadis et al. eLife 2024;13:RP91915. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.91915  22 of 29
References
Acklam PJ. 2003. MATLAB Array Manipulation Tips and Tricks. No Publisher.
Agha G. 1986. Actors: A Model of Concurrent Computation in Distributed Systems. IEEE xplore. DOI: https://​
doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/1086.001.0001
Akam T, Lustig A, Rowland JM, Kapanaiah SK, Esteve-­ Agraz J, Panniello M, Márquez C, Kohl MM, Kätzel D,
Costa RM, Walton ME. 2022. Open-­ source, Python-­ based, hardware and software for controlling behavioural
neuroscience experiments. eLife 11:e67846. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.67846, PMID: 35043782
Apache. 2015. Apache Airflow - A Platform to Programmatically Author, Schedule, and Monitor Workflows.
Apache Airflow.
Bartlett FC, Burt C. 1933. Remembering: a study in experimental and social psychology. British Journal of
Educational Psychology 3:187–192. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-8279.1933.tb02913.x
Bitter R, Nawrocki M. 2006. LabVIEW: Advanced Programming Techniques. CRC Press.
Brody L. 2007. Bcontrol. Brody Lab.
Dimitriadis G. 2025. Heron-­ repositories. GitHub. https://github.com/Heron-Repositories
Fensel D, Şimşek U, AngeleK, Huaman E, Kärle E, Panasiuk O, Toma I, Umbrich J, Wahler A. 2020. Introduction:
What Is a Knowledge Graph Knowledge Graphs: Methodology, Tools and Selected Use Cases. Springer
International Publishing. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-37439-6_1
Hintjens P. 2013. Pieter Hintjens. O’Reilly Media.
Holzer E. 1998. Vvvv - a Multipurpose Toolkit. vvvv group.
Kindler E, Krivy I. 2011. Object-­ oriented simulation of systems with sophisticated control. International Journal
of General Systems 40:313–343. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/03081079.2010.539975
Lopes G, Bonacchi N, Frazão J, Neto JP, Atallah BV, Soares S, Moreira L, Matias S, Itskov PM, Correia PA,
Medina RE, Calcaterra L, Dreosti E, Paton JJ, Kampff AR. 2015. Bonsai: an event-­ based framework for
processing and controlling data streams. Frontiers in Neuroinformatics 9:7. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3389/fninf.​
2015.00007, PMID: 25904861
Macedo F. 2025. Fgmacedo/python-­ statemachine. b0367f0. Github. http://github.com/fgmacedo/python-​
statemachine
Noone M, Mooney A. 2018. Visual and textual programming languages: a systematic review of the literature.
Journal of Computers in Education 5:149–174. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s40692-018-0101-5
Rocklin M. 2015. Dask: Parallel Computation with Blocked algorithms and Task Scheduling. Python in Science
Conference Austin, Texas. DOI: https://doi.org/10.25080/Majora-7b98e3ed-013
Saunders JL, Wehr M. 2019. Autopilot: Automating Behavioral Experiments with Lots of Raspberry Pis. bioRxiv.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1101/807693
Semeniuta O, Falkman P. 2019. EPypes: a framework for building event-­ driven data processing pipelines. PeerJ.
Computer Science 5:e176. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj-cs.176, PMID: 33816829
Sivji A. 2020. Finite-­ state-­ machine. lightweight, decorator-­ based python implementation of a finite state
machine. 16d93fe. Github. https://github.com/alysivji/finite-state-machine
Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory. 2018. Robotic Operating System. ROS.
Thulasiraman K, Swamy MNS. 1992. Directed graphs. In: Thulasiraman K (Ed). Graphs: Theory and Algorithms.
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. p. 97–125. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118033104
Williams LH. 2019. Thinking through death and employment: The automatic yet temporary use of schemata in
everyday reasoning. European Journal of Cultural Studies 22:110–127. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/​
1367549417719061
Wu Y, Kirillov A, Massa F, Lo WY, Girshick R. 2019. Detectron. 65184fc. Github. https://github.com/​
facebookresearch/detectron2Tools and resources﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿ Neuroscience
Dimitriadis et al. eLife 2024;13:RP91915. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.91915  23 of 29
Appendix 1
Heron folder structures
Appendix 1—figure 1. Heron’s folder structures. (A) The Heron folder structure together with the basic scripts
that comprise Heron’s core functionality. (B) The Heron Node repository folder structure (to be found in the
Operations folder for each group of Nodes in the same repository). (C) An example of a repository with four
Nodes: the Weird_Camera Source in subcategory Vision, the Super_Motion_Controller Transform in subcategory
Motion and the Sinks Saving_CSVs in Saving and Some_Other_Sink_Node in General. The __top__ folder with
the file ​ ignore.​ ignore git file is required to allow Heron to create the list of Nodes presented to the users live as its
folder structure is updated with new Node folders.Tools and resources﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿ Neuroscience
Dimitriadis et al. eLife 2024;13:RP91915. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.91915  24 of 29
Appendix 2
Com template
Appendix 2—figure 1. An abbreviated and annotated template for the com script of a Transport Operation.Tools and resources﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿ Neuroscience
Dimitriadis et al. eLife 2024;13:RP91915. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.91915  25 of 29Tools and resources﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿ Neuroscience
Dimitriadis et al. eLife 2024;13:RP91915. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.91915  26 of 29
Appendix 2—figure 2. An abbreviated and annotated template for the worker script of a Transport Operation.Tools and resources﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿ Neuroscience
Dimitriadis et al. eLife 2024;13:RP91915. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.91915  27 of 29
Appendix 3
Com code example
def work_function(data, parameters):
  global vis
  global lengths_blockx
  global current_block
  global reward_contingencies
  global correct_licks
   vis = parameters [0]
   message = data[1:] # data[0] is the topic
  message =
  Socket.reconstruct_array_from_bytes_message_cv2correction(message)
   # If the message comes from the Trial controller
  if len (message)==2:
      # The Trial controller sends [previous_stim, correct_port_licks]
     previous_stim = message[0]
     correct_port_licks = message [1]
      # Add the number of correct licks to the current running sum
      correct_licks[previous_stim]=
      correct_licks[previous_stim] + correct_port_licks
      # If the number of correct licks reaches the block length of
      # that stim then swap block and zero the running sum of
     # licks for that stim
     if correct_licks[previous_stim]==
      lengths_block[current_block[previous_stim]][previous_stim]:
       create_new_block_sizes(previous_stim)
       temp = ​ copy.​ copy(​ current_​ block[previous_stim])
       current_block[previous_stim]=
       int (not current_block[previous_stim])
       correct_licks[previous_stim]=0
   if vis:
        print(f’Changing block of stim {previous_stim},
         from block {temp} to
         block {current_block[previous_stim]}’)
        print(f’Current block lengths = {lengths_block}’)
   current_stim = ​np.​random.​randint(​0, 4)
  current_correct_reward_port_probability =
      reward_contingencies[current_block[current_stim]][current_stim]
  current_correct_reward_port =Tools and resources﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿ Neuroscience
Dimitriadis et al. eLife 2024;13:RP91915. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.91915  28 of 29
  ​np.​random.​binomial(​1,​current_​correct_​reward_​port_​probability)
   result = [​np.​array([current_stim,
        current_correct_reward_port,
        current_block[current_stim]])]
  return result
Worker code example
def work_function(data, parameters):
global vis
global respond_after_lick
global start_delay
global odour_window
global pre_response_delay
global response_window
global reward_window
global inter_trial_window
global trial_number
trial_number +=1
try:
    vis = parameters[0]
except:
   pass
# Get message in from previous Node
message = data[1:] # data[0] is the topic
message =
Socket.reconstruct_array_from_bytes_message_cv2correction(message)
stim = message[0]
reward_port = message [1]
block_of_stim = message [2]
if vis:
     print (f’===========Starting Trial {trial_number} ==========’)
    print(f’Current Stim = {stim},
     current correct reward port = {reward_port}’)
start_trial_time = now()
if vis:
    print (f’ ooo Waiting Start Delay {start_delay}’)
gu.accurate_delay(start_delay * 1000)
open_stim_time = now()
if vis:
    print(’====Arduino Open Stim {}’.format (stim))
​arduino_​serial.​write(​stim_​on_​commands[stim])
if vis:
    print (f’ooo Starting Odour Delay {odour_window}’)
gu.accurate_delay(odour_window * 1000)Tools and resources﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿ Neuroscience
Dimitriadis et al. eLife 2024;13:RP91915. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.91915  29 of 29
close_stim_time = now()
if vis:
print (f’===Arduino Close Stim {stim}’)
​arduino_​serial.​write(​stim_​off_​commands[stim])
if vis:
print (f’ooo Starting Pre-­ Response Delay{pre_response_delay}’)
gu.accurate_delay(pre_response_delay * 1000)
correct_port_lick, start_response_time = read_arduino(reward_port)
if respond_after_lick and correct_port_lick:
   start_reward_time, end_reward_time =
   reward(correct_port_lick, reward_port)
elif respond_after_lick and not correct_port_lick:
   if vis:
       print(" ooo Correct port hasn’t been licked = No reward")
    start_reward_time = ​datetime.​datetime.​now()
    end_reward_time = start_reward_time
elif not respond_after_lick:
    start_reward_time, end_reward_time =
   reward(correct_port_lick, reward_port)
if vis:
    print (f’ooo Starting Response Delay {reward_window}’)
gu.accurate_delay(reward_window * 1000)
iti = ​np.​random.​uniform(​inter_​trial_​window[0], inter_trial_window[1])
if vis:
    print (f’ooo Starting ITI Delay {iti}’)
gu.accurate_delay(iti * 1000)
end_iti_time = now()
result = [​ np.​ array([stim, correct_port_lick]),
      ​ np.​ array([start_trial_time, open_stim_time,
      close_stim_time,
      start_response_time, start_reward_time,
      end_reward_time, end_iti_time, str (stim),
      str (reward_port), str (block_of_stim),
      str (correct_port_lick)])]
if vis:
    print (f’ ooo Stim and Correct Port Lick = {result[0]}’)
    print (’============Ended Trial{trial_number}==============’)
   print (’———————————————-———————————————-————————————’)
return result