RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
For numbered affiliations see
end of the article
Correspondence to: G S Collins
gary.collins@csm.ox.ac.uk
(or @GSCollins onTwitter;
ORCID 0000-0002-2772-2316)
Additional material is published
online only. To view please visit
the journal online.
Citethisas:BMJ2024;385:e078378
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/
bmj-2023-078378
Accepted: 17 January 2024
TRIPOD+AI statement: updated guidance for reporting
clinical prediction models that use regression or machine
learning methods
GaryS Collins,1
Karel G M Moons,2
Paula Dhiman,1
Richard D Riley,3,4
Andrew L Beam,5
Ben Van Calster,6,7
Marzyeh Ghassemi,8
Xiaoxuan Liu,9,10
Johannes B Reitsma,2
Maarten van Smeden,2
Anne-Laure Boulesteix,11
Jennifer Catherine Camaradou,12,13
Leo Anthony Celi,14,15,16
Spiros Denaxas,17,18
Alastair K Denniston,4,9
Ben Glocker,19
Robert M Golub,20
Hugh Harvey,21
Georg Heinze,22
Michael M Hoffman,23,24,25,26
André Pascal Kengne,27
Emily Lam,12
Naomi Lee,28
Elizabeth W Loder,29,30
Lena Maier-Hein,31
Bilal A Mateen,17,32,33
Melissa D McCradden,34,35
Lauren Oakden-Rayner,36
Johan Ordish,37
Richard Parnell,12
Sherri Rose,38
Karandeep Singh,39
Laure Wynants,40
Patricia Logullo1
TheTRIPOD (TransparentReporting ofa
multivariable prediction modelfor
IndividualPrognosisOr Diagnosis)
statementwaspublishedin 2015 to
provide the minimum reporting
recommendationsfor studies
developing or evaluating the
performance ofa prediction model.
Methodologicaladvancesin the fieldof
prediction have since includedthe
widespreaduse ofartificialintelligence
(AI) poweredbymachine learning
methodsto develop prediction models.
An update to theTRIPOD statementis
thusneeded.TRIPOD+AI provides
harmonisedguidance for reporting
prediction modelstudies, irrespective
ofwhether regression modelling or
machine learning methodshave been
used.The new checklistsupersedesthe
TRIPOD 2015 checklist, which should
no longer be used.Thisarticle
describesthe developmentof
TRIPOD+AI andpresentsthe expanded
27 item checklistwith more detailed
explanation ofeach reporting
recommendation, andtheTRIPOD+AI
for Abstractschecklist.TRIPOD+AI aims
to promote the complete, accurate, and
transparentreporting ofstudiesthat
develop a prediction modelor evaluate
itsperformance. Complete reporting
willfacilitate studyappraisal, model
evaluation, andmodelimplementation.
Prediction models are used across diﬀerent healthcare
settings. They are used to estimate an outcome value
or risk. Most models estimate the probability of the
presence of a particular health condition (diagnostic)
orwhetheraparticularoutcomewilloccurinthefuture
(prognostic).1
Their primary use is to support clinical
decision making, such as whether to refer patients
for further testing, monitor disease deterioration or
treatment eﬀects, or initiate treatment or lifestyle
changes. Examples of well known prediction models
include EuroSCORE II (cardiac surgery),2
the Gail
model (breast cancer),3
the Framingham risk score
(cardiovascular disease),4
IMPACT (traumatic brain
injury),5
and FRAX (osteoporotic and hip fractures).6
Prediction models are abundant in the biomedical
literature, with thousands of models published
annually(andincreasing),andhavebeendevelopedfor
many outcomes and health conditions.7 8
At least 731
diagnostic and prognostic prediction model studies on
covid-19 were published during the first 12 months
of the pandemic.9
Despite this interest in developing
prediction models, there have been longstanding
SUMMARY POINTS
There has been considerable interest and financial investment in developing
prediction models by applying artificial intelligence (AI) methods, typically
powered by advances in machine learning
To ensure that a prediction model study is valuable to users, authors should
prepare a transparent, complete, and accurate account of why the research was
done, what they did, and what they found
An update of the TRIPOD (Transparent Reporting of a multivariable prediction
model for Individual Prognosis Or Diagnosis) statement aims to harmonise
the landscape of prediction model studies using AI methods and to provide
guidance regardless of whether regression models or machine learning methods
have been used
The TRIPOD+AI statement consists of a 27 item checklist, an expanded checklist
that details reporting recommendations for each item, and a TRIPOD+AI for
Abstracts checklist containing 13 items
TRIPOD+AI aims to assist authors in the complete reporting of their study and
help peer reviewers, editors, policymakers, end users, and patients understand
the data, methods, findings and conclusions of AI driven research
Adherence to the TRIPOD+AI reporting recommendations could encourage the
improved use of research time, effort, and money
thebmj|BMJ2024;385:e078378 | doi: 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378 1
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
. by guest on 23 July 2026 https://www.bmj.com/ Downloaded from 16 April 2024. 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378 on BMJ: first published asRESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
concerns about transparency and completeness of
reporting in the field,10 11
and the resulting usability.
For readers (including peer reviewers, editors, health
professionals, regulators, patients, and the general
public), incomplete or inaccurate reporting impairs
the ability to critically appraise the study design
and methods, have confidence in the findings, and
further evaluate or implement a prediction model.
Poor reporting of a model might also mask flaws in the
design, data collection, or conduct of a study that, if
the model was implemented in the clinical pathway,
could cause harm. Harm can be perceived to occur
when insuﬃcient measures are in place to mitigate
bias. Better reporting can create more trust and
influence patient and public acceptability of the use
of prediction models in healthcare. Authors have an
ethicalandscientificobligationtohonestlyreporttheir
research in a complete and transparent manner. As
noted by the late Doug Altman and colleagues, “Good
reporting is not an optional extra; it is an essential
component of research”12
—anything less is little more
than avoidable research waste.13
In response to concerns about incomplete
reporting,10 11 14 15
the TRIPOD (Transparent Reporting
of a multivariable model for Individual Prognosis
Or Diagnosis) statement was published in 2015
(TRIPOD 2015) to provide minimum reporting
recommendations.16 17
TRIPOD 2015 comprises a
checklist of 37 items, which includes 25 items to
report in both development and validation studies,
and an additional six items for model development
studies and six items for validation studies.
Accompanying the checklist is an explanation and
elaboration document that provides the rationale
behind each reporting item; published examples of
good reporting; and a discussion of issues relating to
the design, conduct, and analysis of prediction model
studies.17
TRIPOD 2015 mainly focused on models
developed using regression modelling, which was the
prevailing approach at the time. Additional guidance
has since been created for reporting abstracts of
prediction model studies (TRIPOD for Abstracts18
),
studies developing or validating prediction models
using clustered data (TRIPOD-Cluster19 20
), systematic
reviews and meta-analyses of prediction model studies
(TRIPOD-SRMA21
), and guidance in preparation for
study protocols (TRIPOD-P22
). All available guidance,
as well as template checklists for filling out separately,
can also be found on the TRIPOD website (https://
www.tripod-statement.org/).
Since the publication of TRIPOD 2015, there
have been numerous methodological advances
in prediction modelling, including sample size
guidance for developing models23-27
and evaluating
their performance,28-32
and greater recognition of
operationalising fairness,33
reproducibility,34
and
adopting open science principles.35
However, interest
andfinancialinvestmentinapplyingmethodsascribed
to artificial intelligence (AI), typically powered by
advances in machine learning methods (eg, random
forests, deep learning), is where we have seen the
most progress and change. With increasing access to
data and availability of oﬀ-the-shelf software to apply
machine learning methods, developing a prediction
model has become faster and easier. Vast numbers
of prediction models are now entering the scientific
literature for many clinical settings, and for a wide
rangeofoutcomesandhealthconditions,withmultiple
models often available for the same outcome, health
condition, and target population.7 8 36
The ability to
critically evaluate the quality of prediction models and
understand their ability to serve well in a particular
setting or for a particular use case is therefore of even
greater critical importance. This ability is predicated
on complete and transparent reporting.
However, systematic reviews evaluating studies of
predictionmodelshaveshownthattheyareoftenpoorly
conducted (including deficiencies in study design or
data collection37 38
); use poor methodology37 38
; are
incompletely reported with key details missing39-54
;
are consequently at high risk of bias41 49 55-57
; rarely
adhere to open science practices,58
and are susceptible
to overinterpretation or so-called spin.59 60
These
deficiencies cast considerable doubt on models’
usefulness and safety, and raises concerns about their
potentialtocreateorwidenhealthcaredisparities.61
While
TRIPOD2015islargelyagnostictothetypeofmodelling
approach, and much of its reporting recommendations
apply equally to non-regression approaches, additional
reporting considerations are needed for the growing
class of machine learning methods. For example, unlike
regression based models, the flexibility and complexity
underpinning other machine learning approaches
typically means that the resulting prediction models do
not result in a simple equation and sometimes even the
predictors used remain unclear. Additional reporting
considerationsarethereforeneededthatarenotcurrently
covered in TRIPOD 2015. Alongside methodological
advancements, considerations of fairness,62
wider
acceptance of open science practices,63
and public and
patient involvement in research and implementation of
research,64 65
an update to the TRIPOD 2015 statement
is needed to capture these developments and the
consequencesforreporting.
The aim of this paper is to describe the development
of the updated TRIPOD guidance, present the new
TRIPOD+AI checklist, and discuss how to use it.
TRIPOD+AI aims to harmonise the landscape of
prediction model studies and provide guidance
regardless of whether regression models or machine
learning methods have been used.66
The “+” in
TRIPOD+AI indicates that it provides consolidated
reporting recommendations for studies of prediction
models developed using regression modelling or
machine learning (ie, deep learning, random forests)
approaches. We also use the additional term “AI” to
be consistent with existing reporting guidelines for
studies broadly labelled as involving AI. However,
for readability, this article will refer to the methods
underpinning them as machine learning (table 1). A
glossary of terms (box 1) clarifies key concepts used
within the TRIPOD+AI reporting guideline.
2 doi: 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378|BMJ2024;385:e078378 | thebmj
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
. by guest on 23 July 2026 https://www.bmj.com/ Downloaded from 16 April 2024. 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378 on BMJ: first published asRESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
Development of TRIPOD+AI
We describe the development of the TRIPOD+AI
statement, a guideline to aid the reporting of studies
developingpredictionmodelsfordiagnosisorprognosis
using machine learning or regression methods or
evaluating (validating) their performance. There is no
such thing as a validated prediction model.76
To avoid
ambiguity and harmonise terminology, we refer to
validationasevaluation74
inthisarticle(box1).Existing
reporting guidelines and those in development for
reporting other types of biomedical studies involving
a machine learning component are detailed in table 1.
Literature reviews and consensus exercises were used
to develop the TRIPOD+AI checklist as recommended
by the EQUATOR Network.77
A steering group was
convened by GSC and KGMM to oversee the guideline
development process, with members selected to cover
a broad range of expertise and experience (comprising
GSC, KGMM, RDR, ALB, JBR, BVC, XL, and PD).
In April 2019, a commentary was published
announcing the TRIPOD+AI initiative.78
The guideline
was registered as a reporting guideline under
development with the EQUATOR Network on 7 May
2019 (https://www.equator-network.org/). A study
protocol was made available on 25 March 2021 on
the Open Science Framework (https://osf.io/zyacb/),
describingtheprocessandmethodsusedtodevelopthe
TRIPOD+AI reporting guideline. The protocol, which
alsodescribesthedevelopmentofaqualityassessment
and risk-of-bias tool for prediction models developed
using machine learning methods (PROBAST+AI), was
published in 2021.79
The reporting of the consensus
basedmethodsusedinthedevelopmentofTRIPOD+AI
followed the ACCORD (Accurate Consensus Reporting
Document) recommendations.80
Ethics
This study was approved by the Central University
research ethics committee, University of Oxford on
10 December 2020 (R73034/RE001). Participant
information was provided to the Delphi survey
participants electronically before starting the survey
andtotheconsensusparticipantsbeforetheconsensus
meeting. Delphi survey participants provided
electronic informed consent before completing the
survey.
Candidate item list generation
An initial list of items was drafted by GSC and KGMM
using TRIPOD 2015.16 17
Additional items were
identified from TRIPOD-Cluster,19 20
TRIPOD for
Abstracts,18
CAIR,81
MI-CLAIM,82
CLAIM,68
MINIMAR,83
SPIRIT-AI,71
and CONSORT-AI,72
along with additional
literature identified by the steering group.34 84-89
The list
ofitems was also informed by thefindings of systematic
reviews evaluating the reporting, methods, and
overinterpretation of prediction model studies using
machine learning.37-39 48 51 54 59 60
The steering group
harmonised the initial list of items to form a final list of
65 unique candidate items covering the title (one item);
abstract(oneitem);introduction(threeitems);methods
(37 items); results (15 items); discussion (five items),
and other (three items). This list was used in a modified
Delphi exercise as described below.
Recruitment of Delphi panellists
Delphi participants were identified by the steering
committee, from authors of relevant publications
via a call to participate on social media (eg, Twitter),
and through personal recommendations. Including
experts recommended by other Delphi participants.
The steering group identified participants to achieve
geographical and disciplinary diversity and include
key stakeholder groups, for example, researchers
(statisticians/data scientists, epidemiologists,
machine learning researchers/scientists, clinicians,
radiologists, and ethicists), healthcare professionals,
journal editors, funders, policymakers, healthcare
regulators, patients, and the general public as end
users of prediction models from a range of settings
(eg, universities, hospitals, primary care, biomedical
journals, non-profit organisations, and for-profit
organisations).
No minimum sample size was placed on the number
of Delphi participants. A steering group member
checked the expertise or experience of each identified
person. Individuals were then invited to participate
via email and were sent an information pack with the
study description, aims, and contact details. Once
participants accepted, they were added to the Delphi
panel and received the link to the survey. Delphi
panellists did not receive any financial incentive or gift
to participate.
Table 1 | Reporting guidelines for healthcare studies using machine learning
Reporting guideline Scope
STARD-AI Studies evaluating the diagnostic accuracy of an artificial intelligence based test (in preparation)67
TRIPOD+AI Studies developing or evaluating the performance of a prediction model, using artificial intelligence, including machine learning methods
CLAIM Medical imaging studies using artificial intelligence68
DECIDE-AI Early stage clinical evaluation (including safety, human factors evaluation) of decision support systems driven by artificial intelligence69
CHEERS-AI Studies describing health economic evaluations to estimate the value for money (cost effectiveness) of artificial intelligence interventions70
SPIRIT-AI Protocols for clinical trials evaluating an intervention with an artificial intelligence component71
CONSORT-AI Clinical trial reports evaluating an intervention with an artificial intelligence component72
PRISMA-AI Systematic reviews and meta-analyses of artificial intelligence interventions (in preparation)73
STARD=Standards for Reporting of Diagnostic Accuracy; TRIPOD=Transparent Reporting of a multivariable prediction model for Individual Prognosis Or Diagnosis; AI=artificial intelligence;
CLAIM=Checklist for Artificial Intelligence in Medical Imaging; DECIDE=Decisions in health Care to Introduce or Diffuse innovations using Evidence; CHEERS=Consolidated Health Economic
Evaluation Reporting Standards; SPIRIT=Standard Protocol Items: Recommendations for Interventional Trials; CONSORT=Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials; PRISMA=Preferred Reporting
Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses.
thebmj|BMJ2024;385:e078378 | doi: 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378 3
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
. by guest on 23 July 2026 https://www.bmj.com/ Downloaded from 16 April 2024. 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378 on BMJ: first published asRESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
Delphi process
The Delphi surveys were designed and delivered
electronically using the Welphi online platform (www.
welphi.com) to be responded to individually, online,
and in English. The platform ensures responses are
anonymousbysendingadiﬀerentlinktoeachparticipant
and applying codes to respondents. The panellists
received a package of information clarifying the study’s
Box 1: Glossary of terms used in TRIPOD+AI
ThedefinitionsanddescriptionsgivenbelowrelatetothespecificcontextoftheTRIPOD+AI*guideline;theydonotnecessarilyapplytootherareas
ofresearch.
Artificialintelligence
Fieldofcomputersciencethatfocusesondevelopingmodelsandalgorithmscapableofperformingtasksthattypicallyrequirehumanintelligence.
Calibration
Agreementbetweenobservedoutcomesandestimatedvaluesfromthemodel.Calibrationisbestassessedgraphicallywithaplotoftheestimated
valuesonthexaxisandobservedvaluesontheyaxis,withasmoothedflexiblecalibrationcurveintheindividualdata.
Carepathway
Structuredandcoordinatedplanofcareformanagingaspecifichealthconditionordealingwithapatient’shealthcareneedsthroughouttheir
healthcarejourney.
Classimbalance
Whenthefrequencyofindividualswithandwithouttheoutcomeeventisunequal.
Discrimination
Howwellthepredictionsfromthemodeldifferentiatebetweenindividualswithandwithouttheoutcome.Discriminationistypicallyquantifiedbythe
cstatistic(sometimesreferredtoastheareaunderthecurve(AUC)orareaunderthereceiveroperatingcharacteristics(AUROC))forbinaryoutcomes,
andthecindexfortime-to-eventoutcomes.
Evaluationortestdata
Datausedtoestimatetheperformanceofapredictionmodel,sometimesreferredtoastestdataorvalidationdata.†Evaluationdatashouldbe
distinctfromthedatausedtotrainthemodel,tunehyperparameters,ordomodelselection,suchthatthereisnooverlapinparticipantsbetweenthe
trainingandevaluationdata.Evaluationdatashouldberepresentativeofthepopulationinwhomthemodelistobeused.
Fairness
Propertyofpredictionmodelsthatdonotdiscriminateagainstindividualsorgroupsofindividualsbasedonattributessuchasage,race/ethnicity,
sex/gender,orsocioeconomicstatus.
Hyperparameters
Valuesthatcontrolthemodeldevelopmentorlearningprocess.
Hyperparametertuning
Findingthebest(hyper)parametersettingsforaparticularmodelbuildingstrategy.
Internalvalidation
Evaluatingtheperformanceofapredictionmodelonthesamepopulationonwhichthemodelwasdeveloped(eg,traintestsplit,crossvalidation,or
bootstrapping).
Machinelearning
Asubfieldofartificialintelligencethatfocusesondevelopingmodelscapableoflearningandmakingpredictionsordecisionsfromdata,without
beingexplicitlyprogrammed.
Modelevaluation
Evaluatingpredictiveaccuracyofamodelbyestimatingmodeldiscrimination(eg,cstatistic),modelcalibration(eg,calibrationplot,calibration
slope),andclinicalutility(eg,decisioncurveanalysis).Thisprocessisreferredtoasevaluatingapredictionmodel.7475
Outcome
Diagnosticorprognosticeventthatisbeingpredicted.Inmachinelearning,thiseventisoftenreferredtoasthetargetvalue,responsevariable,orlabel.
Predictor
Characteristicthatcanbemeasuredorattributedatanindividuallevel(eg,age,systolicbloodpressure,sex,diseasestage,radiomicsfeatures)or
grouplevel(eg,country).Itisalsooftenreferredtoasaninput,feature,independentvariable,orcovariate.
Trainingordevelopmentdata
Datausedtotrainordevelopapredictionmodel.Thetrainingdataareideallyrepresentativeofthepopulationinwhomthemodelistobeused.
*TRIPOD=TransparentReportingofamultivariablepredictionmodelforIndividualPrognosisOrDiagnosis;AI=artificialintelligence.
†Validationdataoftenhasdifferentmeanings.Forexample,inmachinelearningstudies,validationdatacanrefertodatausedforparametertuningordatausedto
evaluatemodelperformance(oftenreferredtoasexternalvalidation).Toavoidanyambiguity,werefertodatausedtoevaluatemodelperformanceasevaluationdata.
4 doi: 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378|BMJ2024;385:e078378 | thebmj
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
. by guest on 23 July 2026 https://www.bmj.com/ Downloaded from 16 April 2024. 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378 on BMJ: first published as