Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48512-w
Systematic review and meta-analysis of
ex-post evaluations on the effectiveness
of carbon pricing
Niklas Döbbeling-Hildebrandt 1,2
, Klaas Miersch 1,3
, Tarun M. Khanna 1,4
,
Marion Bachelet1
, Stephan B. Bruns 5,6,7
, Max Callaghan 1
,
Ottmar Edenhofer1,3,8
, Christian Flachsland1,9
, Piers M. Forster 2
,
Matthias Kalkuhl 1,10
, Nicolas Koch 1,11
, William F. Lamb 1,2
, Nils Ohlendorf1,3
,
Jan Christoph Steckel 1,12
& Jan C. Minx 1,2
Today, more than 70 carbon pricing schemes have been implemented around
theglobe,buttheircontributionstoemissionsreductionsremainsasubjectof
heateddebateinscienceandpolicy.Hereweassesstheeffectivenessofcarbon
pricing in reducing emissions using a rigorous, machine-learning assisted
systematic review and meta-analysis. Based on 483 effect sizes extracted from
80 causal ex-post evaluations across 21 carbon pricing schemes, we ﬁnd that
introducing a carbon price has yielded immediate and substantial emission
reductions for at least 17 of these policies, despite the low level of prices in
most instances. Statistically signiﬁcant emissions reductions range
between –5% to –21% across the schemes (–4% to –15% after correcting for
publication bias). Our study highlights critical evidence gaps with regard to
dozens of unevaluated carbon pricing schemes and the price elasticity of
emissions reductions. More rigorous synthesis of carbon pricing and other
climate policies is required across a range of outcomes to advance our
understanding of “what works” and accelerate learning on climate solutions in
science and policy.
Countries are not on track to meet the climate goals they com-
mitted to under the Paris Agreement1,2
. To step up implementa-
tion, learning about what policy instruments work in reducing
emissions at the necessary speed and scale is critical. But despite
more than three decades of experience with carbon pricing and
more than 70 implementations of both carbon taxes (37) and cap-
and-trade (36) schemes around the world3
at national, regional and
sub-national level, there remains no consensus in science nor
policy as to how effective such policies are in reducing greenhouse
gas (GHG) emissions.
Proponents have suggested carbon pricing asa key instrument to
incentivise GHG emissions reductions on the basis that it would avoid
theneedfordetailedregulatorydecisionstargetedatspeciﬁcemission
sources4–8
. However, the effectiveness of carbon pricing is highly
dependent on the context and the effect could be higher or lower
based on the institutions and infrastructures9,10
. Critics doubt the
Received: 9 May 2023
Accepted: 2 May 2024
Check for updates
1
Mercator Research Institute on Global Commons and Climate Change, Berlin, Germany. 2
Priestley International Centre for Climate, School of Earth and
Environment, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK. 3
Technische Universität, Berlin, Germany. 4
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. 5
Centre for
Environmental Sciences, Hasselt University, Hasselt, Belgium. 6
International Center for Higher Education Research (INCHER), University of Kassel,
Kassel, Germany. 7
Meta-Research Innovation Center at Stanford (METRICS), Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. 8
Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact
Research, Potsdam, Germany. 9
Hertie School Centre for Sustainability, Berlin, Germany. 10
Faculty of Economics and Social Sciences, University of Potsdam,
Potsdam, Germany. 11
Institute of Labor Economics (IZA), Bonn, Germany. 12
Brandenburg University of Technology, Cottbus, Germany.
e-mail: doebbeling@mcc-berlin.net; minx@mcc-berlin.net
Nature Communications|(2024)15:4147 1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;ability of carbon pricing to unlock the investments required for the
development and application of low carbon technologies11
. There are
also concerns about whether policymakers can overcome political
barriers and raise carbon prices high enough to deliver emissions
reductions at the scale and pace required11–13
.
We aim to systematically review the empirical literature on the
effectiveness of carbon pricing policies in reducing GHG emissions.
While there are other market based policy instruments, such as fuel
taxes, import taxes or value added taxes, we focus here on policies
which impose a carbon price across fuels based on their carbon con-
tents. One way to assess the effects of carbon pricing is to evaluate
experiences in the real world. A growing scientiﬁc literature has pro-
videdquantitativeevaluationsoftheeffectsofdifferentcarbonpricing
schemes on emissions14–16
. This evidence is usually provided in the
form of quasi-experimental studies which assess the effect of the
introduction of the policy (treatment effect). Based on this evidence,
our meta-analysis addresses the question: What was the emissions
reduction effect of the introduction of a carbon price during the early
years of its application? This is different from the question, how
emissions respond to gradual changes in existing carbon prices.There
exist only very few studies estimating this relationship between the
carbon price level and emissions17–19
. The comprehensive literature on
the elasticity of fuel use in response to fuel price changes has been
reviewed before in a number of meta-analyses20–24
.
We focus on the growing evidence base on the effectiveness of
introducing a carbon price. Reviews of this literature have tended not
to employ rigorous systematic review methods such as meta-analysis.
A number of reviews describe the literature and summarise the ﬁnd-
ings of the primary studies butdo notattempta quantitative synthesis
of the ﬁndings15,25–27
. Green provides a range of effect sizes reported in
the reviewed literature without any formal methodology for their
harmonisationandanalysis,concludingthatthepolicyhasnooronlya
very small effect on emission reductions (0–2%)28
. None of the avail-
able reviews provide a critical appraisal of the quality of the primary
studies considered. Biases of such traditional literature reviews have
been widely documented in the literature29,30
. The lack of compre-
hensive systematic review evidence on a multitude ofpolicyquestions
hampers IPCC assessments to learn from implemented climate
policies31–33
.
We ﬁll this gap by conducting a systematic review and meta-
analysis of the empirical ex-post literature on the effectiveness of
carbon pricing, covering 21 enacted carbon tax and cap-and-trade
policies around the globe following the guidelines by the Collabora-
tion for Environmental Evidence34
. We use a machine-learning
enhanced approach as proposed by Callaghan and Müller-Hansen35
to screen 16,748 studies from ﬁve different literature databases,
identifying 80 relevant ex-post policy assessments. We extract and
harmonise estimates of average emissions reductions from the intro-
duction of a carbon price. We conduct a meta-analysis on 483 effect
sizes on 21 different carbon pricing schemes and estimate emissions
reduction effects.We study the heterogeneity in the reported ﬁndings
andconductacriticalappraisalaswellasapublicationbiasassessment
to analyse the impact of different study design choices on the results.
Our methodology is transparent and reproducible, ensuring that our
analysis isupdatablein the futureasnew informationand experiences
with carbon pricing policies are gained around the world36
. The data
and code is publicly available: https://github.com/doebbeling/carbon_
pricing_effectiveness.git.
We ﬁnd consistent evidence that carbon pricing policies have
caused emissions reductions. Statistically signiﬁcant emissions
reductions are found for 17 of the reviewed carbon pricing policies,
withimmediateandsustainedreductionsofbetween–5%to–21%(–4%
to –15% when correcting for publication bias). Our heterogeneity
analysis suggests that differences in estimates from the studies are
driven by the policy design and context in which carbon pricing is
implemented, while often discussed factors like cross-country differ-
ences in carbon prices, sectoral coverage, and the design of the policy
as a tax or trading scheme do not capture the identiﬁed heterogeneity
in effect sizes.
Results
Evidence base — larger and more diverse than previously
suggested
With the help of our machine-learning assisted approach, we identify
80 quantitative ex-post evaluations across 21 carbon pricing schemes
aroundtheglobe(seeMethods).Previousreviewscoveredamaximum
of 35 research articles on the emissions reduction effect of carbon
pricing policies15,25,26,28
.
As shown inTable1, the carbon pricing schemes covered hereare
very diverse and differ in terms of their speciﬁc policy design, scope,
and policy context. For example, some of the schemes are targeted at
large scale emitters in the industry and energy sectors, while others
focus on households via home energy use and the transport sector. In
the European Union, some sectors are regulated with a carbon tax
while others are covered by the European wide emission trading
scheme. We also observe substantial differences in carbon price levels
of the covered schemes. All of these differences may give rise to
considerable variations in emissions reductions achieved.
Beyondthesedifferencesinpolicydesign,carbonpricelevels,and
regional contexts, all considered policy experiences speak to the
question whether carbon pricing is or is not effective in reducing GHG
emissions. A systematic assessment and comparison of the outcomes
of these policies can inform policymakers and future research by
synthesising the available evidence.
The number of available ex-post evaluations on the effectiveness
of carbon pricing differs substantially across schemes. Prior reviews
suggested a bias towards evaluating schemes in Europe and North
America15,26,28
, however here we ﬁnd that the vast majority of the
available ex-post evidence on the effectiveness of carbon pricing
assess the pilot emission trading schemes in China — 35 of the 80
articles. There are 13 studies on the European emissions trading
scheme (EU ETS), seven on British Columbia and ﬁve on the Regional
Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI) in the United States. The remaining
schemes are evaluated by a single or very few studies.
Our systematic review also reveals some fundamental evidence
gaps in the literature. Despite the broad set of bibliographic databases
searched, we found evidence only for 20 out of 73 carbon pricing
policies in place in 20233
and for the Australian carbon tax, which was
repealed two years after its implementation. For some, more recently
implemented, policies this may be explained by the time needed for
sufﬁcient data to become available, be assessed, and the results pub-
lished. But even of the 38 carbon pricing schemes already imple-
mented by 2015, for 18 of these we could not ﬁnd a single study on
effectiveness, despite the broad set of bibliographic databases sear-
ched (see SupplementaryInformation). Thereisalsolittleevidence on
the effectiveness of carbon pricing relative to the level of the carbon
price (carbon price elasticity). We identify only nine price elasticity
studies, providing too few effect sizes for meta-analysing these
separately.
Average emissions reductions across carbon pricing schemes
In order to provide a meaningful and transparent synthesis of the
available quantitative evidence, we harmonise the effect sizes extrac-
ted from the individual studies to a common treatment effect metric
followingstandardsystematicreviewguidance34
.Thistreatmenteffect
is expressed as the percentage difference between the counterfactual
emissions without carbon pricing and observed emissions after the
introductionofacarbonprice.Itassumesemissionsreductionstotake
place at the time of the introduction of the policy and to persist
throughout the observation period as a constant difference to
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48512-w
Nature Communications|(2024)15:4147 2counterfactual emissions. Most studies directly provide treatment
effects, which we standardise to represent a percentage change in
emissions levels. Effect sizes provided as price elasticity are inter-
pretedatthe mean carbon price (seeMethods).Overall,we harmonise
483 effect sizes from 80 reviewed articles, covering 21 carbon pricing
schemes that provide the starting point for our quantitative synthesis.
Our results show that carbon pricing effectively reduces green-
house gas emissions. We use multilevel random and mixed effects
models to account for dependencies among effect sizes in our sample
and estimate the average treatment effects. The mixed effects model
includes dummy variables for each of the included carbon pricing
schemes to estimate the effectiveness for each of the schemes. As
depicted in Panel a of Fig. 1, emissions reduction effects are observed
consistentlyacrossschemes with considerable variation inmagnitude.
For 17 of the carbon pricing schemes we ﬁnd statistically signiﬁcant
average reduction effects from the introduction of a carbon price. The
estimated reduction effects range from about –21% to about –5%.
Across carbon pricing schemes, we ﬁnd that on average the policy has
reduced emissions by –10.4% [95% CI = (–11.9%, –8.9%)]. This effect is
both substantial and highly statistically signiﬁcant.
The reviewed literature provides large differences in the amount
andqualityofevidenceforindividualschemes.Focusingonthosewith
the largest evidence base, we ﬁnd an average treatment effect for the
eight Chinese ETS pilots of –13.1% [95% CI = (–15.2%, –11.1%)], which is
higher than the –10.4% average treatment effect across the schemes.
The EU ETS and the British Columbia carbon tax both have estimated
emission reduction effects below the overall average treatment effect.
Theseareestimatedat–7.3%[95%CI=(–10.5%,–4.0%)]and–5.4%[95%
CI = (–9.6%, –1.2%)]. Reduction effects smaller than –5% are only
reported in three instances with severe problems in study design
exposing estimates to a high risk of bias (Korean ETS, Australian car-
bon tax, Swiss ETS).
Critical appraisal and publication bias
The average treatment effects presented in the previous section were
based on all reviewed studies. However, the quality of the primary
studies is not uniform and some are subject to biases in the study
design. Additionally, the average treatment effect might be subject to
publication bias. Therefore we re-estimate the treatment effects by
adjusting for potential quality issues and publication bias, adopting
transparent and reproducible criteria.
We critically appraise each primary study, to identify potential
biases in the study design. These biases often arise from the unrea-
sonable selection of a control group used in a quasi-experimental
design; from inadequately controlling for confounding factors like the
introduction of other relevant policies; or from statistical
Table 1 | Carbon pricing policies
Policy Jurisdiction Introduction Sector coverage Emission
coverage
Mean
price
Studies Effect
sizes
Chinese pilot ETS 46 179
o/w Hubei pilot ETS Hubei, China 2014 industry 27% $3 4 13
o/w Beijing pilot ETS Beijing, China 2013 industry, power, transport and buildings 24% $8 2 3
o/w Shanghai
pilot ETS
Shanghai, China 2013 industry, buildings, transport 36% $4 2 3
o/w Guangdong
pilot ETS
Guangdong, China 2013 industry, aviation 40% $5 2 2
o/w Shenzhen
pilot ETS
Shenzhen, China 2013 industry, power, buildings, transport 30% $7 1 2
o/w Tianjin pilot ETS Tianjin, China 2013 industry, buildings 35% $4 2 2
EU ETS 30 European
countries
2005 power, manufacturing industry, aviation 38% $20 13 77
Swedish carbon tax Sweden 1991 transport, buildings 40% $103 2 77
BC carbon tax British Columbia,
Canada
2008 industry, power, transport and buildings 70% $18 7 39
Saitama ETS Saitama, Japan 2011 industry, power, buildings 17% $108 3 20
Tokyo ETS Tokyo, Japan 2010 industry, power, buildings 20% $106 4 14
Quebec ETS Quebec, Canada 2013 industry, power, transport and buildings 77% $9 2 10
RGGI 11 northeastern US
states
2009 power 14% $3 8 10
UK carbon price
support
United Kingdom 2013 power 24% $22 4 10
Finnish carbon tax Finland 1990 industry, transport, buildings 36% $6 2 8
Swiss ETS Switzerland 2008 industry, power 11% $18 1 5
Australian carbon tax Australia 2012* industry, power 60% $24 1 2
California CaT California, USA 2012 industry, power, transport, buildings 74% $12 2 2
Korea ETS Korea 2015 industry, power, buildings, domestic avia-
tion, public sector, waste sector
74% $15 2 2
Cross-country 4 18
Total 101 483
AllinformationonthecarbonpricingschemeswasretrievedfromtheWorldBank3
,exceptforthepricedatafortheEUETS,whichisretrievedfromICAP53
.Theinformationforthesectorcoveragewas
simpliﬁed.Formoredetailedinformationonthecoverage,includingcoveredorexemptedsubsectors,thereaderisreferredtotheWorldBankdata.Cross-countrystudiesanalysecountrieswithand
without carbon pricing, not focusing on a speciﬁc carbon pricing scheme. The effects of the eight Chinese pilot ETS schemes are often analysed collectively in a single study, while some studies
focusonindividualschemes.Weonlylistpilotsthathavebeenstudied individually.TheAustraliancarbontaxwasrevoked in2014.Meanpricesareunweighted averagepricesinconstant2010US$
duringtheperiodanalysedbythestudiesinoursample.“Emissioncoverage"istheshareofajurisdictionsemissionscoveredbythecarbonpricein2022.Thenumberofstudiesexceedsthenumber
of reviewed articles, as some articles include more than one relevant study using disparate datasets.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48512-w
Nature Communications|(2024)15:4147 3speciﬁcations that do not allow to single out the policy effect. The
assessment criteriafor the critical appraisal are set out in the methods
section and the Supplementary Information. 46% of the reviewed
studies are assessed to have a medium or high risk of bias. When we
remove studies with medium or high risk of bias from the sample, the
average treatment effects for some of the schemes are adjusted by up
to 5 percentage points, while the estimation uncertainty increases due
to the reduction of considered primary estimates (see Fig. 1, Panel d).
The identiﬁed biases, however, do not systematically impact the esti-
mated treatment effects in either direction. The average treatment
0.16%
−5.43%
−18.9%
−13.14%
−5.85%
−7.27%
−14.83%
−3.16%
−8.54%
−21.05%
−6.3%
−10.17%
14.25%
−7.29%
−9.78%
−10.42%
Power
>=80%
<80%
NA
−5.32%
−12.93%
−4.93%
−7.43%
−16.59%
−10.62%
−21.02%
−1.06%
−5.43%
−5.97%
−7.81%
−10.8%
0.17%
−5.66%
−15.1%
−8.66%
−4.25%
−7.79%
−1.58%
−7.92%
−6.1%
−5.27%
−5.46%
−8.49%
−6.83%
−30 −20 −10 0 10 20 30
%−change in emissions
RoB
low
medium
high
g. Average emission effect (adequately powered estimates)
a. Average emission effects (full sample) c. Statistical Power
f. Statistical Power
h. Risk of Bias
b. Risk of bias
i. Statistical Power
e. Risk of bias d. Average emission effect (low risk of bias)
2
39
2
179
18
77
8
2
10
7
20
77
5
14
10
470
1
7
2
46
4
13
2
2
2
5
3
2
1
4
4
98
s e z i s t c e f f E s e z i s t c e f f E s e z i s t c e f f E s e z i s t c e f f E s e z i s t c e f f E s e z i s t c e f f E s e z i s t c e f f E s e z i s t c e f f E s e z i s t c e f f E s e z i s t c e f f E s e z i s t c e f f E s e z i s t c e f f E s e z i s t c e f f E s e z i s t c e f f E s e i d u t S s e i d u t S s e i d u t S s e z i s t c e f f E s e z i s t c e f f E s e i d u t S s e i d u t S s e i d u t S s e i d u t S s e i d u t S s e i d u t S s e i d u t S s e i d u t S s e i d u t S s e i d u t S s e i d u t S s e i d u t S Studies
Total
Australian carbon tax
Swiss ETS
California CaT
Finnish carbon tax
Korea ETS
Quebec ETS
Swedish carbon tax
Saitama ETS
cross−country
Tokyo ETS
UK carbon price support
RGGI
BC carbon tax
EU ETS
Chinese pilot ETS
39
139
13
21
3
6
7
9
2
9
5
253
7
32
2
4
1
1
5
1
1
1
2
57 Total
Australian carbon tax
Swiss ETS
California CaT
Finnish carbon tax
Korea ETS
Quebec ETS
Swedish carbon tax
Saitama ETS
cross−country
Tokyo ETS
UK carbon price support
RGGI
BC carbon tax
EU ETS
Chinese pilot ETS
2
29
1
26
14
30
1
4
1
17
10
7
142
1
7
1
14
3
7
1
2
1
2
3
2
44 Total
Australian carbon tax
Swiss ETS
California CaT
Finnish carbon tax
Korea ETS
Quebec ETS
Swedish carbon tax
Saitama ETS
cross−country
Tokyo ETS
UK carbon price support
RGGI
BC carbon tax
EU ETS
Chinese pilot ETS
Fig. 1 | Average emissions changes by scheme. Panel (a, d, g) present weighted
mean effect sizes together with their 95% conﬁdence intervals based on multilevel
random and mixed effects models and represent the effect of the policy observed
in each period afterits introductionincomparisonto the counterfactualemissions
without the policy. The estimates are ordered according to the number of studies
they comprise (depicted on the left). The average treatment effect for the Chinese
ETS pilots comprises the effects of all eight regional pilot schemes. Cross-country
collects the evidence from studies assessing countries with and without carbon
pricing, not focusing on a speciﬁc carbon pricing scheme. Panel (a, d, g) comprise,
respectively n=470, n=253, and n=142 effect sizes clustered on the study level.
Panels (b, e, h) show the distribution of assigned risks of bias (RoB). Panel (c, f, i)
show the distribution of statistical power. Power above 80% is considered ade-
quate. For synthetic control designs no statistical power was derived, thus pre-
sented as “NA".
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48512-w
Nature Communications|(2024)15:4147 4effect across policies is practically unchanged when removing studies
with medium or high risk of bias.
Secondly,weadjusttheaveragetreatmenteffectfortheinﬂuence
of publication bias. Publication biascould arisefroma tendencyin the
literature towards only publishing statisticallysigniﬁcant effects37–40
. A
precisioneffecttest41,42
conﬁrmsthepresenceofpublicationbiasinthe
set of studies reviewed here (see Supplementary Information). As
suggested in the literature, we correct for publication bias by esti-
mating average effects for a subsample of effect sizes with adequate
statistical power (see Methods)38
, which applies to about 30% of the
reviewed effect sizes. This subsample analysis adjusts most of the
scheme-wise average treatment effects towards lower estimated
emissions reductions (see Fig. 1, Panel g), ranging from –15% to –4%.
Across the schemes, the average treatment effect is reduced to –6.8%
[95% CI = (–8.1%, –5.6%)]. Despite these adjustments, the publication
bias corrected estimates support the overall ﬁnding that carbon pri-
cing policies cause signiﬁcant reductions in in GHG emissions.
Studies with a high risk of bias and low power are not uniformly
distributedacrossschemes.Someschemesareevaluatedonlybyafew
biased studies, resulting in very high or low average treatment effects.
For example, when considering all available evidence, the carbon pri-
cing schemes in South Korea,Switzerland, and Australia are estimated
tohavethelowestnegativeoreven positiveaveragetreatmenteffects.
These estimates are based entirely on studies with a high risk of bias
andarenolongerconsideredwhenre-estimatingthetreatmenteffects
based on low risk of bias studies (see Fig. 1d). The two carbon pricing
policies from the United States (CaliforniaCaT, RGGI), which showthe
largest negative average treatment effect when considering all avail-
able studies, show lower average treatment effects after the adjust-
ment for publication bias (see Fig. 1g). For other schemes, like the EU
ETS and British Columbia’s carbon tax, there is no substantial change
in the average treatment effect when studies with high risk of bias are
excluded.
Explaining heterogeneity in effect sizes
There is considerable variation in the effect sizes reported by primary
studies included in this review. This could arise from heterogeneity in
the design of the carbon pricing policies or from heterogeneity in the
design of the primary studies. The carbon pricing literature mainly
discusses three policy design factors that could potentially explain
differences in the effectiveness of the policy. First, there are debates
whether carbon prices are better applied as carbon taxes or as emis-
siontradingschemes5,43–47
.Secondly,itisarguedthatthepolicycauses
different reduction rates in different sectors48–50
. And thirdly, the level
of the carbon price can be expected to play a decisive role for the
magnitude of the emission reductions5,51,52
. We assess whether, and to
what extent, such factors are able to explain differences in the treat-
ment effects reported. We test which factors are most relevant to
explain the reported emissions reductions by using scheme and study
characteristics as explanatory variables in meta-regressions.
As we are confronted with a large number of potentially relevant
explanatory variables, we use Bayesian model averaging (BMA) to
assess the heterogeneity in the estimated effect sizes reported by the
different studies. BMA is particularly suitable for meta-analysis as it
allows for running a large number of meta-regressions with different
possible combinations of explanatory variables and does not require
selecting one individual speciﬁcation (see Methods). We include
explanatory variables for the three policy design factors provided
above: price level, sector coverage, and a variable differentiating
between carbon taxes and cap-and-trade schemes. In addition we add
dummy variables for each of the carbon pricing schemes, capturing
the remaining policy design and contextual factors of each policy
scheme.Additionally,wetestwhetherstudiesassessinglongerperiods
afterthepolicyimplementationﬁndhigherorlowertreatmenteffects.
To assess the impact of methodological choices made in the studies,
we study a set of variables including the type of study design, esti-
mation method, and data used in the primary studies.
The results from the BMA are provided in Table 2 and Fig. 2. The
posterior inclusion probability (PIP) indicates the relevance of each
variable. Commonly, variables with a PIP above 0.5 are interpreted to
be relevant explanatory factors, while variables with lower PIPs are
unable to capture the observed heterogeneity. The table furthermore
provides the posterior mean and standard deviation of the estimated
effect averaged across allmeta-regressions thatinclude the respective
variable.
Variation in carbon prices, the sectoral coverage of schemes, and
choice of carbon tax vs. cap-and-trade do not seem to be important
variables in explaining the observed heterogeneity in emissions
reductions(PIP<0.5).Insteadthedummyvariablesfortheplacewhere
Table 2 | Heterogeneity assessment using Bayesian model
averaging
PIP Post mean Post SD
RGGI 1.00 –28.45 5.09
Chinese_pilot_ETS 0.99 –9.76 2.23
Swiss_ETS 0.80 14.35 8.93
Data_City 0.78 11.39 7.63
duration 0.76 –0.64 0.46
synthetic_control 0.42 2.87 3.87
tax 0.41 –3.11 4.24
BC_carbon_tax 0.38 3.90 5.65
Swedish_carbon_tax 0.36 –3.05 4.65
Coal 0.32 –2.58 4.26
Less_Bias 0.30 1.16 2.00
Finnish_carbon_tax 0.25 –2.89 5.70
TransLevelLevel 0.19 –0.70 1.67
Data_Region 0.12 –0.40 1.30
log_carbon_price 0.09 0.15 0.62
Data_Sector 0.09 0.25 1.02
Gas 0.08 –0.44 1.88
other_schemes 0.05 –0.31 2.00
Tokyo_ETS 0.04 0.15 1.03
industrial_sectors 0.04 –0.04 0.77
Data_Firm 0.04 0.07 0.54
Data_Plant 0.03 0.04 0.47
DVTotal 0.03 0.03 0.51
Saitama_ETS 0.03 0.05 0.65
SE_percent 0.03 –0.00 0.00
Gasoline 0.03 –0.02 0.62
Quebec_ETS 0.03 –0.06 0.82
Data_Month 0.03 –0.02 0.52
Data_Year 0.03 0.01 0.41
Data_Airline 0.03 –0.00 0.75
(Intercept) 1.00 –5.99
The table provides the results of meta-regressions using Bayesian model averaging. The
dependent variable for each of the meta-regression models is the percentage change in emis-
sions. Theposteriorinclusionprobability (PIP)indicatestherelevanceof eachvariable. Variables
with PIP≥0.5 are considered relevant for explaining the heterogeneity in carbon emissions
reductions reported across primary studies. Post Mean and Post SD represent the mean and
standard deviation of the posterior distribution for a respective explanatory variable. Five vari-
ables havePIP≥0.5andare considered relevant(marked inbold):thedummyvariables forRGGI,
Chinese pilot ETS, Swiss ETS, Data_City, and duration. The dummy variables represent the geo-
graphiclocationinwhichthepolicywasimplemented,withthereferencelocationbeingEUETS.
Data_City captures whether primary studies used city level data versus country level data. The
variabledurationcapturesthenumberofyearsforwhichdataontheschemewascollectedafter
the policy was implemented. Deﬁnitions of the other explanatory variables are provided in
the Supplementary Information.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48512-w
Nature Communications|(2024)15:4147 5the schemes are applied do a better job in explaining this hetero-
geneity than the variables that capture speciﬁc design characteristics.
The variables for the RGGI and the Chinese ETS pilots have a larger
reduction effect on emissions than the EU ETS, which is set as the
reference category. The Swiss ETS is estimated to have less of a
reduction effect compared to the benchmark. Alternative speciﬁca-
tions of the BMA, provided in the Supplementary Information, also
estimate a larger reduction effect for the Swedish carbon tax com-
paredtothebenchmark.Thedirectionsofthesecoefﬁcientsareinline
with the average treatment effects presented in Fig. 1, for the respec-
tive geographies.
Ifweremovethedummyvariablesfortheschemes,thesizeofthe
carbon price becomes an important variable inthe BMAto explain the
heterogeneity in emission reductions with a PIP close to 1 (see Sup-
plementary Information). However, in the absence of the scheme
dummies the effect of the price variable is likely to be confounded as
the scheme dummies account for any omitted context variable that
does not vary within a scheme. The high correlation of 0.96 between
the scheme dummies and the price variable indicates that the price
variable captures the heterogeneity between schemes. In fact, the
price coefﬁcient is estimated with a positive sign in the BMA speciﬁ-
cation without the scheme dummies, implying that lower emissions
reductions are achieved with higher carbon prices. The counter-
intuitivedirectionofthepriceeffectindicatesamisspeciﬁcationofthe
model when the scheme dummies are excluded. Below we discuss
possible causes for this inverse relationship between the price and the
reduction effect in our data. The effect of carbon prices on emissions
reductions is better identiﬁed by adding schemedummies to focus on
the variation of prices within each scheme. However, the largest share
of the variation in our carbon price variable comes from variation
between the schemes (91%) andonly 9% from withinschemevariation.
This is not a limitation of our dataset. Indeed, carbon prices tend to
Cumulative Model Probabilities
0 0.05 0.12 0.19 0.25 0.31 0.38 0.44 0.5 0.56 0.62 0.69 0.75 0.81 0.88 0.94 1
Data_Airline
Data_Year
Data_Month
Quebec_ETS
Gasoline
SE_percent
Saitama_ETS
DVTotal
Data_Plant
Data_Firm
industrial_sectors
Tokyo_ETS
other_schemes
Gas
Data_Sector
log_carbon_price
Data_Region
TransLevelLevel
Finnish_carbon_tax
Less_Bias
Coal
Swedish_carbon_tax
BC_carbon_tax
tax
synthetic_control
duration
Data_City
Swiss_ETS
Chinese_pilot_ETS
RGGI
Fig. 2 | Heterogeneity assessment using Bayesian model averaging. The col-
umns in the ﬁgure depict the best 26,435 estimated meta-regressions, with each
column showing the outcome of one estimated meta-regression model. The
dependent variable for each of the meta-regression models is the percentage
change in emissions. The possible explanatory variables are depicted in the rows
(ordered by their PIP in descending order) and the explanatory variables included
in a respective meta-regression model of the column is indicated by the colours.
Redcolourindicatesthevariablewasincludedwithanegativesign(largeremission
reductions).Blue colour indicates a positive sign (smaller emission reductions).No
colour indicates that the variable was not included in the meta-regression model
representedby thatcolumn. Thehorizontalaxisindicates the cumulative posterior
model probabilities across all models. The models are ranked by their posterior
model probability with the model on the left accounting for the largest posterior
model probability. The deﬁnitions of the explanatory variables are provided in
the Supplementary Information.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48512-w
Nature Communications|(2024)15:4147 6varystronglyacrosscountriesbasedonthedesignandcoverageofthe
scheme. But for individual schemes prices have historically been
stagnant (EU ETS till recently, RGGI, Chinese ETS pilots) or increases
relatively modest (BC carbon tax)53
and the effect size estimates eval-
uatedhereprovidelimitedtimefrequency.Wesuspectthatduetothis
low variation, our sample has insufﬁcient power to identify carbon
prices as a relevant factor in explaining emissions reductions.
Studies assessing the effectiveness of carbon pricing over longer
time periods ﬁnd larger emission reductions. The coefﬁcient for the
variabledurationhasaPIPof0.76andisestimatedwithanegativesign
for all regression speciﬁcations it is included in. Testing for the spatial
and temporal granularity of the data suggests that only the use of city
level data compared to the country level explains some of the het-
erogeneity in reported effect sizes. Methodological differences in the
reviewedstudies onlyhave a minor inﬂuenceon effectsizes. Theseare
discussed in further detail, in the Supplementary Information.
In line with the previous section, we also include the risk of bias
variable and the standard error, capturing the publication bias. They
arebothnotdetectedtobemostrelevanttoexplaintheheterogeneity.
Discussion
Inthisﬁrstquantitativemeta-analysisofcarbonpricingevaluations,we
ﬁnd robust evidence that existing carbon pricing schemes that have
been evaluated to date are effective in reducing GHG emissions. Our
machine-learning enhanced approach to study identiﬁcation ﬁnds
more than twice as many ex-post evaluations than existing
reviews15,25,26,28
,studyingtheeffectivenessof21carbonpricingpolicies.
Our meta-analysis ﬁnds that at least 17 of these policies have caused
signiﬁcant emissions reductions ranging from –5% to –21%. These are
substantially larger than the 0% to –2% suggested in the recent and
widely cited review by Green28
, which lacks a clear and transparent
methodology to synthesise the literature29
, not allowing us to formally
compare our results. Our ﬁnding is robust to biases from poor study
designs aswell aspublication bias.Correcting for the latter adjusts the
range of observed emissions reductions to –4% to –15% across carbon
pricing schemes.
The synthesis of research ﬁndings across carbon pricing schemes
provides comprehensive and consistent evidence of its effectiveness,
despite the heterogeneity of policy designs and regional contexts.
Compared to the recent assessment report by the IPCC, which pro-
videsaquantiﬁcationofachievedreductionsonlyfortheEUETS54
,our
systematic review adds synthesised emission reduction estimates for
more than a dozen carbon pricing schemes. We provide these esti-
mates together with uncertainty ranges and a transparent assessment
of study quality and highlight the presence of substantial variation in
emissions reductions achieved across the schemes in our sample,
rangingfrom–5%forthecarbontaxinBritishColumbiato–21%forthe
RGGI.WeconductanearlyapplicationofBayesianmodelaveragingfor
meta-regressions on our dataset of 483 effect sizes to disentangle
which factors explain these differences. The ﬁndings suggest that the
individual context and policy design of the schemes best explain the
heterogeneity in achieved emissions reductions. These are the most
relevant explanatory factors despite controlling for broader policy
design features like the sectoral coverage or the design as carbon tax
or carbon trading scheme as well as for study design features of the
primary studies.
Our heterogeneity analysis does not identify a relationship
between the pricelevel and the achieved emissions reductions, i.e. the
size of the emissions reductions observed across schemes from the
introduction of a carbon price cannot be explained well by the carbon
price level. This is not surprising as marginal abatement costs may
differ widely as, for example, prominently acknowledged in the lit-
erature on linking carbon pricing schemes55,56
. It is further different
fromtheexpectationthathighercarbonpricesleadtolargeremissions
reductions within a carbon pricing scheme as commonly found in
available assessments of fuel price elasticities24,57,58
. In line with this
argument, we ﬁnd that the relationship between carbon price levels
and emissions reductions in our meta-analytic framework is domi-
natedbytheacross-schemevariationinprices,whichaccountsfor91%
of the variation in our dataset while the variation within schemes only
accounts for 9%. The interpretation for not ﬁnding a clear relationship
should thus rather be that when implementing a carbon price in two
countries with different country contexts, the country with the higher
carbon price would not necessarily experience the higher emissions
reductions.
This can be observed, for instance, when looking at the cases of
China, the EU, and British Columbia. The reviewed literature ﬁnds
larger emissions reduction effects for the pilot emission trading
schemes in China (–13.1%) than for the EU ETS (–7.3%) and the carbon
tax in British Columbia (–5.4%), despite the very low carbon prices of
the Chinese schemes. The average prices of the eight Chinese pilot
schemesareallbelowUS$8duringthestudyperiod,whiletheaverage
prices for the EU and British Columbia are at US$ 20 and US$ 18,
respectively. This is likely a result of lower abatement costs in China59
together with differences in the policy contexts of the countries. The
effectiveness is certainly inﬂuencedby other policies in place. In China
indirectcarbonpricesarelowerthanintheEUcountriesandCanada60
,
allowing for a higher marginal effect of the implementation of the ETS
pilots in China. Non-pricing instruments alsodiverge acrosscountries.
In addition, the implementation of a carbon price (even with a low
price)canhaveasignallingeffecttowardstheemitters,underliningthe
commitment of the government towards climate mitigation. Evidence
for the Guangdong province suggests that signalling has signiﬁcantly
contributedtotheachievedemissions reductionsinthecontextofthe
introductionoftheETSpilotsinChina61
.Anotherexamplehighlighting
therelevanceofthecontextofthepolicyimplementationisthecaseof
the RGGI. The policy implementation coincides with the shale gas
boom, which drastically reduced the prices of natural gas in the USA
and started around the same time as the RGGI was implemented. In
face of these general price dynamics in the US energy sector, RGGI
participating states reduced their emissions considerably stronger
compared to non-regulated states62,63
, while the carbon price was only
US$ 3 on average.
Even if across schemes the price level of the carbon price, is not
found to be the relevant driver of the emissions reductions achieved
withtheintroductionofthepolicy,withinaschemetheeffectivenessis
expected to increase with increasing prices. This is well studied for
otherchangesinfuelprices,whicharefoundtosubstantiallyreduceits
consumption57,58
.Thatliteraturestudiesallpossiblepricechangesona
single fuel, while the here assessed literature on carbon prices studies
the effect of a single policy instrument across all fuels. It is thus a
complementary but distinct body of evidence. Meta-analyses estimate
a reduction of fuel consumption between 0.31% and 0.85% in the long
run for a 1% increase in the fuel price20–24
.
Within the literature evaluating the policy effectiveness we iden-
tiﬁed only nine primary studies estimating semi-elasticities of carbon
prices. Four are using the stepwise introduction of the carbon tax in
BritishColumbiatoestimateelasticitiesforthetransportandbuildings
sectors17,18,64,65
, while one is conducted respectively for RGGI63
and EU
ETS19
. In addition, some studies estimate elasticities across countries
and carbon pricing schemes15,66,67
. These studies support what was
already known from studies on the price elasticity of fuel
consumption20–24,57,58
: increasing prices reduce fuel use and emissions.
Hence, as carbon prices further rise after the introduction additional
emissionsreductionsareachieved.Interestingly,somestudiessuggest
that an increase in the carbon tax leads to larger emissions reductions
than anincrease ofthe samesize inthe market priceof the fuel17,18,64,65
.
It will thus be a relevant avenue for future research to understand
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48512-w
Nature Communications|(2024)15:4147 7whetheritisageneralisableﬁndingthatpriceelasticitiesarehigherfor
policy induced price changes compared to market price changes of
fossil fuels. Such research could draw on the comprehensive evidence
from the fuel price literature.
Our meta-regression results suggest that the policy effectiveness
of carbon pricing policies increases with time. Studies covering longer
time periods after the introduction of the carbon price report larger
emissions reductioneffects comparedto assessments for shorter time
periods. While this ﬁnding should be treated with caution, as most of
the primary studies assume constant treatment effects for their esti-
mations, it hints towards increasing emissions reductions in the years
following the policy introduction. The assumption of constant treat-
ment effects reﬂects not only methodological considerations of the
primarystudies,butisalsobasedontheexpectationthataslongasthe
carbon price of the implemented policy is unchanged, the emission
reduction effect should not intensify. The ﬁnding of our meta-
regression to some extend counters that assumption. An increasing
policy effectiveness could be a result of steady adjustment processes,
enforced by innovation and investments into cleaner production and
infrastructure. Additionally, the literature reviewed here provides
some evidence that an increasing policy stringency has also played its
role in strengthening the effectiveness of the policy. Increases in the
carbon prices led to additional emissions reductions in Sweden68
and
the United Kingdom69
. Similar effects are found for the EU ETS, where
the effectiveness increases with the increasing stringencyfrom phases
I, II, and III70–73
.
Whiletheharmonisationandsynthesisoftheemissionsreduction
effects provides an overview of the policy effectiveness across a large
number of policy schemes, it raises a number of policy relevant
research questions, which cannot be answered with our purely quan-
titative, meta-econometric approach – which is inherently dependent
on the available evidence base. These limitations could be addressed
using promising and widely unexplored mixed method review designs
such as realist synthesis74,75
which systematically combine quantitative
andqualitative information tobetterunderstandwhyparticularpolicy
designs work, under what conditions, and why. Some research gaps,
however, need to be ﬁlled by further primary research. First, there are
morethan50carbonpricingschemesthathavenotyetbeenevaluated
for their emission reduction effect, despite some of them being
enacted for more than ten years (see Supplementary Information).
Others have still been studied insufﬁciently or only poorly. Second, we
lack ex-post evidence of higher carbon prices. There are currently less
than ten studies assessing emissions reductions in schemes with mean
carbon prices higher than US$ 30 across the observation period. As
policy ambitions are raised over time, there is an opportunity to
strengthen that evidence base. Thirdly, this systematic review high-
lights substantial challenges with the quality of available primary evi-
dence. Only about half of the studies assessed here follow rigorous
study designs with a low risk of bias and only 30% of the studies are
adequately powered. While some of this might be related to a lack of
access to adequate data for the most rigorous research designs, high
qualityprimaryresearchisessentialtounderstandtheeffectivenessof
climate policies76
. The multitude of supplementary or conﬂicting
policies as well as other confounding factors pose a challenge to the
clear identiﬁcation of the causal effects of a speciﬁc policy77
. Novel
methods of reverse causality are a promising avenue to address this
challenge78
.
The effectiveness is just one dimension of policy outcome rele-
vant to the selection of the best policy measures. Systematic assess-
ments of the ex-post climate policy literature on a multitude of policy
outcomes and different climate policy options could be the basis for
accelerated learning on climate policies and considerably improve
upcomingIPCCassessments.Unlessweraiseourstandardsanddothis
work, policy makers and society will remain in the dark as to the most
promising pathways towards addressing the climate crisis.
Methods
The systematic review broadly follows the guidance for systematic
reviews by the Collaboration for Environmental Evidence34
, extended
by a machine- learning assisted identiﬁcation of relevant studies. A
descriptionofourmethodshasbeenpublishedasareviewprotocolon
OSF Registries in advance79
.
Literature search
WesearchthebibliographicdatabasesWebofScience,Scopus,JSTOR,
RePEc and the web-based academic search engine Google Scholar
using a broad search string which comprises a large set of carbon
pricing synonyms and indicator words for quantitative ex-post study
designs. The full query can be found in the protocol79
. After the
removal of duplicates the search, conducted in the second week of
March 2022, returned a set of 16,748 articles (see Fig. 3).
We screened these articles for their eligibility in two stages. First,
we screened them at the title and abstract level using the NACSOS
software80
followed by a screening at full text level. Studies are inclu-
ded if they infer a causal relationship between carbon pricing and the
emission development. Eligible studies analyse effects on emission
levels or emission levels per capita. Studies were excluded if they
assesstheeffectonemissionintensityoremissionproductivity,i.e.the
effect on emissions relative to output. The included policy measures
are restricted to explicit carbon taxes and cap-and-trade schemes.
Studiesonimplicitcarbontaxesandcarbonoffsettingmechanismsare
excluded. We only include studies published in English language.
The screening at the title and abstract level was simpliﬁed by an
active learning algorithm, using support vector machines to rank the
studies in the order of relevance. We stopped screening when we were
90% conﬁdent that we had identiﬁed at least 90% of the articles rele-
vant to our systematic review, based on the conservative stopping
criterionprovidedbyCallaghanandMüller-Hansen35
.Thisreducedthe
amount of manually screened documents by 77%. All articles included
afterthetitleandabstractscreeningwerescreenedatfulltext,without
any further application of machine-learning algorithms. Figure 3
depicts the articles included and excluded at each screening stage.
Data extraction and critical appraisal
From the included studies we extract the effect size information,
including the estimated effect size and direction of the effect, the
uncertainty measure, provided as standard error, t statistic, con-
ﬁdence interval, p value, or the indicated signiﬁcance level, as well as
theprovidedmeanemissionsand,forpriceelasticitystudies,themean
carbon price. We also capture information on the studied carbon pri-
cingscheme,timeoftheintervention,studyperiod,emissioncoverage
(sectors, fuels, gases), study design, and estimation method.
We developed criteria for a critical appraisal, by adapting the
ROBINS-I assessment criteria81
to the speciﬁc nature of the research
studiesathand.First,whilethetreatment(i.e.thepolicyapplication)in
the reviewed studies is independent of the conducted research, the
study design should cover a representative sample and suitable data.
The control group needs to have high similarity with the treatment
group, based on demographic, economic, and institutional proximity
and similarity in pre-treatment emissions pathways. Statistical meth-
ods such as matching or synthetic control methods can increase the
comparability of the control group with the treatment group. Second,
the study design must control for confounding factors that are
expected to inﬂuence the emissions of the study objects. For some
studies we identify further risks of bias in the set-up of the statistical
methods, which are also recorded.
Allextracteddataismadepubliclyavailable(seeDataAvailability).
Standardising effect sizes
Westandardisetheextractedeffectsizes,basedontheheterogeneous
study designs and estimation methods, into a common metric. The
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48512-w
Nature Communications|(2024)15:4147 8largest part of the primaryliterature estimates treatment effects using
quasi-experimental study designs (difference-in-differences or
regression discontinuity in time). Afew studies estimate the treatment
effect by comparing the emission levels between countries with and
without carbon pricing without any quasi-experimental design
(termed cross-country studies in this review). Some studies estimate a
carbonpriceelasticity,i.e.theeffectofamarginalchangeinthecarbon
price on emissions. All effect sizes are transformed to treatment
effects measured as a percentage difference between the counter-
factual emissions without the policy and the observed emissions with
the policy in place. Effect sizes expressed in tons of CO2 are standar-
dised using the mean emissions given in the study, while effect sizes
from log-level regression speciﬁcations are standardised using expo-
nential transformation. Effect sizes from price elasticity estimations
areinterpretedatthemeancarbonpriceoftheinterventionduringthe
period studied by the primary study.
Standard errors are derived accordingly. If the statistical (in)sig-
niﬁcance of an estimate at a speciﬁed signiﬁcance level is the only
uncertainty measure provided, this information is used to approx-
imate the standard error. For the non-linear effect size transformation
in the case of log-level regression coefﬁcients, we derive the standard
error by keeping the t statistic constant. For effect sizes from price
elasticity estimations, we interpret the standard errors at the mean
price level, just as for the transformation of the effect size itself.
Effect size averaging
We use a multilevel random effects model to estimate the average
treatment effect. The random effects model does not assume that all
effectsizesconvergetoacommoneffectsizemean82
,whichinourcase
accounts for the heterogeneity in the studied countries and schemes.
The common variance component is estimated using the restricted
maximum likelihood (REML) estimation83,84
. We apply a multilevel
estimation to account for the non-independence of effect sizes from
thesamestudy,assumingacompoundsymmetricvariance-covariance
matrix84
.
For the estimation of average treatment effects for the individual
policyschemesweextendtherandomeffectsmodeltoamixedeffects
model, inserting dummy variables for each carbon pricing scheme.
Studies conducting a cross-sectional assessment of a set of carbon
pricing schemes in multiple countries are collected with a separate
dummy variable. The eight Chinese pilot ETS schemes are collected in
a single dummy variable, as they are commonly assessed together as a
single policyinthe primary studies. For many of the schemes only one
to ﬁve studies are available, which does not allow for appropriate
clustering of the effect sizes85,86
. The multilevel estimation of the
model should still adequately capture the non-independence of effect
sizes from the same study. Clustering of standard errors would have a
marginal impact on the standard errors derived for the full sample
averages (see Supplementary Information). The models are estimated
in R using the metafor package84
.
To check that no single study exerts undue inﬂuence on the
average effect sizes measured, we calculate Cook’s distance and
DFBETAS. For three studies in the sample the values of these metrics
are distinctly different. All three studies assess the effect of emissions
from the burning of coal. As these effects likely result from fuel
switching without capturing the overall emission effect, 13 effect sizes
from ﬁve studies with a focus on emissions from coal are excluded in
themainassessment.Estimatesincludingthesestudiesareprovidedin
the Supplementary Information, resulting in an average treatment
effect of –12.5%.
To correctfor publicationbias, wefollowthe guidanceby Stanley
etal.87
andIoannidisetal.38
andestimatethemodelforareducedsetof
theadequatelypoweredeffectsizes.Toassessthepowerofeacheffect
size we use the standard error of each effect and assume the genuine
effect to be the average treatment effect from our full set random
effects model. We follow common practise and assume studies with
power of above 80% to be adequately powered88
. We estimate a mul-
tilevel random effects model, in line with our main approach, instead
of a ﬁxed effects model proposed in the literature38,87
.
g n i h c r a e S
Studies identified
through Web of
Science
(n = 9,150)
Studies after duplicates removed
(n = 16,748 )
g n i n e e r c S
Studies screened title/abstract
(n = 4,302)
Studies identified for full text
screening
(n = 374)
Studies screened at full text
(n = 333)
Duplicates
(n = 11,938 )
90% confidence that at least 90% of all
relevant documents have been
screened
Studies excluded by title/abstract
screening
(n = 3,980)
Duplicates
(n = 21)
Excluded full texts (n = 253)
Excluded on:
• No relevant effects (n = 208)
• Outcome variable is emissions
intensity or similar (n = 18)
• Effect information incomplete or
missing (n = 22)
• Study not available in English (n = 5)
Studies included after full text
screening
(n = 80)
Studies identified
through Scopus
(n = 13,146)
Studies identified
through JSTOR
(n = 534)
Studies identified
through RePEc
(n = 4,856)
Studies identified
through Google
Scholar
(n = 1,000)
Unretrievable full texts
(n = 20)
Fig. 3 | Flow diagram of the literature search and screening process. Adapted from the ROSES ﬂow diagram for systematic reviews97
.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48512-w
Nature Communications|(2024)15:4147 9Heterogeneity assessment
There is considerable heterogeneity in the effect sizes (I2
=0.86 in the
random effects model). Tocapturethevariationintheresponsetothe
policy, we code variables for the carbon pricing schemes as well as
informationonthesectorcoverageofthescheme(orthestudy,where
the study focuses on a single sector), the mean carbon price level
during the assessment period, and a variable distinguishing carbon
taxes from cap-and-trade schemes. The information on sector cover-
age and the price level was added from external sources53,89
. We fur-
thermore code a set of variables on the study design, estimation
methods, and data used from the primary studies. Details on the
moderator variables are provided in the Supplementary Information.
Given the large number of potential explanatoryvariables,we use
the Bayesian model averaging technique (BMA)22,90–92
, employing a
Markov chain Monte Carlo (speciﬁcally, the Metropolis-Hastings
algorithm of the bms package for R93
) to walk through the most
likely combinations of explanatory variables. In the baseline speciﬁ-
cationweemploytheunitinformationpriorwhichisrecommendedby
Eicher et al.94
. This agnostic prior reﬂects our lack of knowledge
regarding the probability of individual parameter values. To test the
robustness of our estimates we follow Havranek et al.22,92
and use the
dilution prior that adjusts model probabilities by multiplying them by
the determinant of the correlation matrix of the variables included in
the model. Furthermore, as another robustness check, we follow Ley
and Steel and apply the beta-binomial random model prior, which
gives the same weight to each model size95
, as well as Fernández at al.
whousetheso-calledBRICg-prior96
.TheBMAresultsusingalternative
priors are provided in the Supplementary Information.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
The study and effect size data collected for this study have been
deposited in Github and can be accessed here: https://github.com/
doebbeling/carbon_pricing_effectiveness.git.
Code availability
The code used for the meta-analysis has been deposited in Github and
can be accessed here: https://github.com/doebbeling/carbon_pricing_
effectiveness.git.
References
1. IPCC. Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate Change. Con-
tributionof Working Group IIItothe Sixth Assessment Reportof the
IntergovernmentalPanelonClimateChange(CambridgeUniversity
Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, 2022).
2. UNEP. Emissions Gap Report 2022: The Closing Window - Climate
crisis calls for rapid transformation of societies. In The Closing
Window: Climate crisis calls for rapid transformation of societies :
Emissions Gap Report 2022, 65 (Nairobi, 2022). https://www.unep.
org/emissions-gap-report-2022. OCLC: 9689774129.
3. World Bank Carbon Pricing Dashboard: Key statistics for 2023 on
initiatives implemented (2023). https://carbonpricingdashboard.
worldbank.org/map_data.
4. Climate Leadership Council. Economists’ Statement on Carbon
Dividends Organized by the Climate Leadership Council (2019).
https://www.econstatement.org.
5. High-Level Commission on Carbon Prices. Report of the High-Level
Commission onCarbonPrices(World Bank,Washington, DC, 2017).
6. Baumol, W. J. & Oates, W. E. The Use of Standards and Prices for
ProtectionoftheEnvironment.InBohm,P.&Kneese,A.V.(eds.)The
EconomicsofEnvironment,53–65(PalgraveMacmillanUK,London,
1971). http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-1-349-01379-1_4.
7. Montgomery, W. Markets in licenses and efﬁcient pollution control
programs. J. Econ. Theory 5, 395–418 (1972).
8. Sterner, T. et al. Policy design for the Anthropocene. Nat. Sustain-
ability 2, 14–21 (2019).
9. Rosenbloom, D., Markard, J., Geels, F. W. & Fuenfschilling, L. Why
carbon pricing is not sufﬁcient to mitigate climatechange-and how
“sustainability transition policy” can help. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 117,
8664–8668 (2020).
10. Savin, I., Drews, S., Maestre-Andrés, S. & Van Den Bergh, J. Public
views on carbon taxation and its fairness: a computational-
linguistics analysis. Clim. Change 162, 2107–2138 (2020).
11. Patt, A. & Lilliestam, J. The Case against Carbon Prices. Joule 2,
2494–2498 (2018).
12. Green, J. F. Beyond Carbon Pricing: Tax Reform is Climate Policy.
Glob. Policy 12, 372–379 (2021). Publisher: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
13. Rotaris, L. & Danielis, R. The willingness to pay for a carbon tax in
Italy. Transp. Res. Part D: Transp. Environ. 67, 659–673 (2019).
14. Hu, Y., Ren, S., Wang, Y. & Chen, X. Can carbon emission trading
scheme achieve energy conservation and emission reduction?
Evidence from the industrial sector in China. Energy Econ. 85,
104590 (2020).
15. Rafaty,R.,Dolphin,G.&Pretis,F.CarbonPricingandtheElasticityof
CO2 Emissions. Institute for New Economic Thinking Working Paper
Series 1–84 (2020). https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?
abstract_id=3812786.
16. Leroutier, M. Carbon pricing and power sector decarbonization:
Evidence from the UK. J. Environ. Econ. Manag. 111, 102580 (2022).
17. Rivers, N. & Schaufele, B. Salience of carbon taxes in the gasoline
market. J. Environ. Econ. Manag. 74, 23–36 (2015).
18. Xiang, D. & Lawley, C. The impact of British Columbia’s carbon tax
on residential natural gas consumption. Energy Econ. 80,
206–218 (2019).
19. Gugler, K., Haxhimusa, A. & Liebensteiner, M. Effectiveness of cli-
mate policies: Carbon pricing vs. subsidizing renewables. J.
Environ. Econ. Manag. 106, 102405 (2021).
20. Espey, M. Gasoline demand revisited: an international meta-
analysis of elasticities. Energy Econ. 20, 273–295 (1998).
21. Brons, M., Nijkamp, P., Pels, E. & Rietveld, P. A meta-analysis of the
price elasticity of gasoline demand. A SUR approach. Energy Econ.
30, 2105–2122 (2008).
22. Havranek, T., Irsova, Z. & Janda, K. Demand for gasoline is more
price-inelastic than commonly thought. Energy Econ. 34,
201–207 (2012).
23. Espey, J. A. & Espey, M. Turning on the lights: A meta-analysis of
residential electricity demand elasticities. J. Agric. Appl. Econ. 36,
65–81 (2004).
24. Labandeira, X., Labeaga, J. M. & López-Otero, X. A meta-analysis on
the price elasticity of energy demand. Energy Policy 102,
549–568 (2017).
25. Lilliestam, J., Patt, A. & Bersalli, G. The effect of carbon pricing on
technological change for full energy decarbonization: A review of
empirical ex-post evidence. WIREs Climate Change 12 (2021).
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/wcc.681.
26. Köppl, A. & Schratzenstaller, M. Carbon taxation: A review of the
empirical literature. Journal of Economic Surveys joes.12531 (2022).
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/joes.12531.
27. Haites, E. Carbon taxes and greenhouse gas emissions trading
systems: what have we learned? Clim. Policy 18, 955–966 (2018).
28. Green, J. F. Does carbon pricing reduce emissions? A review of ex-
post analyses. Environ. Res. Lett. 16, 043004 (2021).
29. Haddaway, N. R. et al. Eight problems with literature reviews and
how to ﬁx them. Nat. Ecol. Evolut. 4, 1582–1589 (2020).
30. VanDenBergh,J.&Savin,I.Impactofcarbonpricingonlow-carbon
innovation and deep decarbonisation: Controversies and path for-
ward. Environ. Resour. Econ. 80, 705–715 (2021).
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48512-w
Nature Communications|(2024)15:4147 1031. Minx, J. C., Callaghan, M., Lamb, W. F., Garard, J. & Edenhofer, O.
Learning about climate change solutions in the IPCC and beyond.
Environ. Sci. Policy 77, 252–259 (2017).
32. Minx, J. C., Haddaway, N. R. & Ebi, K. L. Planetary health as a
laboratory for enhanced evidence synthesis. Lancet Planet. Health
3, e443–e445 (2019).
33. Berrang-Ford, L. et al. Editorial: Evidence synthesis for accelerated
learning on climate solutions. Campbell Syst. Rev. 16, 1 (2020).
34. Collaboration for Environmental Evidence. Guidelines and Stan-
dards for Evidence Synthesis in Environmental Management, vol.
Version 5.0 (2018). http://www.environmentalevidence.org/
Documents/Guidelines/Guidelines4.2.pdf.
35. Callaghan, M. & Müller-Hansen, F. Statistical stopping criteria for
automated screening in systematic reviews. Syst. Rev. 9, 273
(2020).
36. Elliott, J. et al. Decision makers need constantly updated evidence
synthesis. Nature 600, 383–385 (2021).
37. Ioannidis, J. P. A. Why most published research ﬁndings are false.
PLoS Med. 2, e124 (2005).
38. Ioannidis, J. P. A., Stanley, T. D. & Doucouliagos, H. The power of
bias in economics research. Econ. J. 127, F236–F265 (2017).
39. Rosenthal,R.Theﬁledrawerproblemandtolerancefornullresults.
Psychol. Bull. 86, 638–641 (1979).
40. Brodeur, A., Lé, M., Sangnier, M. & Zylberberg, Y. Star wars: The
empirics strike back. Am. Econ. J.: Appl. Econ. 8, 1–32 (2016).
41. Egger, M., Smith, G. D., Schneider, M. & Minder, C. Bias in meta-
analysis detected by a simple, graphical test. BMJ 315,
629–634 (1997).
42. Stanley, T. D. Meta-Regression Methods for Detecting and Esti-
mating Empirical Effects in the Presence of Publication Selection.
Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics (2007). https://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1468-0084.2007.00487.x.
43. Weitzman, M. L. Prices vs. Quantities. Rev. Econ. Stud. 41,
477 (1974).
44. Hepburn, C. Regulation by prices, quantities, or both: A review of
instrument choice. Oxf. Rev. Econ. Policy 22, 226–247 (2006).
45. Kalkuhl, M. & Edenhofer, O. Prices vs. Quantities and the Inter-
temporal Dynamics of the Climate Rent. SSRN Electr. J. (2010).
https://www.ssrn.com/abstract=1605112.
46. Goulder, L. H. & Schein, A. R. CARBON TAXES VERSUS CAP AND
TRADE:ACRITICALREVIEW.Clim.ChangeEcon.04,1350010(2013).
47. Foramitti, J., Savin, I. & van den Bergh, J. C. Emission tax vs. permit
trading under bounded rationality and dynamic markets. Energy
Policy 148, 112009 (2021).
48. Flachsland, C., Brunner, S., Edenhofer, O. & Creutzig, F. Climate
policies for road transport revisited (II): Closing the policy gap with
cap-and-trade. Energy Policy 39, 2100–2110 (2011).
49. Kesicki, F. & Strachan, N. Marginal abatement cost (MAC) curves:
confronting theory and practice. Environ. Sci. Policy 14,
1195–1204 (2011).
50. Tang,B.-J.,Ji,C.-J.,Hu,Y.-J.,Tan,J.-X.&Wang,X.-Y.Optimalcarbon
allowance price in China’s carbon emission trading system: Per-
spectivefrom the multi-sectoral marginalabatement cost. J. Clean.
Prod. 253, 119945 (2020).
51. Kaufman,N.,Barron,A.R.,Krawczyk,W.,Marsters,P.&McJeon,H.A
near-term to net zero alternative to the social cost of carbon for
setting carbon prices. Nat. Clim. Change 10, 1010–1014 (2020).
52. Streﬂer, J. et al. Alternative carbon price trajectories can avoid
excessive carbon removal. Nat. Commun. 12, 2264 (2021).
53. International Carbon Action Partnership. Allowance Price Explorer
(2022). https://icapcarbonaction.com/en/ets-prices.
54. National and Sub-national Policies and Institutions. In IPCC (ed.)
Climate Change 2022 - Mitigation of Climate Change, 1355–1450
(CambridgeUniversityPress,2023),1edn.https://www.cambridge.
org/core/product/identiﬁer/9781009157926%23c13/type/
book_part.
55. McKibbin, W. J., Shackleton, R. & Wilcoxen, P. J. What to expect
from an international system of tradable permits for carbon emis-
sions. Resour. Energy Econ. 21, 319–346 (1999).
56. Flachsland,C., Marschinski, R. &Edenhofer, O. To linkor not to link:
beneﬁts and disadvantages of linking cap-and-trade systems. Clim.
Policy 9, 358–372 (2009).
57. Sterner, T. Fuel taxes: An important instrument for climate policy.
Energy Policy 35, 3194–3202 (2007).
58. Dahl, C. A. Measuring global gasoline and diesel price and income
elasticities.Model.Transp.(Energy)DemandPolicies41,2–13(2012).
59. Morris, J., Paltsev, S. & Reilly, J. Marginal Abatement Costs and
Marginal Welfare Costs for Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reductions:
Results from the EPPA Model. Environ. Model. Assess. 17,
325–336 (2012).
60. Agnolucci, P.et al. Measuring Total Carbon Pricing. The World Bank
Research Observer lkad009 (2023). https://academic.oup.com/
wbro/advance-article/doi/10.1093/wbro/lkad009/7283905.
61. Xiang, C. & van Gevelt, T. Political signalling and emissions trading
schemes in China: Insights from Guangdong Province. Energy
Sustain. Dev. 71, 307–314 (2022).
62. Murray, B. C. & Maniloff, P. T. Why have greenhouse emissions in
RGGI states declined? An econometric attribution to economic,
energymarket, and policyfactors.Energy Econ. 51, 581–589 (2015).
63. Zhou,Y.&Huang,L.Howregionalpoliciesreducecarbonemissions
in electricity markets: Fuel switching or emission leakage. Energy
Econ. 97, 105209 (2021).
64. Lawley, C. & Thivierge, V. Reﬁning the evidence: British Columbias
carbon tax and household gasoline consumption. The Energy
Journal39 (2018). http://www.iaee.org/en/publications/ejarticle.
aspx?id=3056.
65. Erutku, C. & Hildebrand, V. Carbon Tax at the Pump in British
Columbia and Quebec. Can. Public Policy 44, 126–133 (2018).
66. Best, R., Burke, P. J. & Jotzo, F. Carbon Pricing Efﬁcacy: Cross-
Country Evidence. Environ. Resour. Econ. 77, 69–94 (2020).
67. Kohlscheen, E., Moessner, R. & Takats, E. Effects of Carbon Pricing
and Other Climate Policies on CO 2 Emissions (2021). Publisher:
CESifo Working Paper.
68. Runst, P. & Thonipara, A. Dosis facit effectum why the size of the
carbon tax matters: Evidence from the Swedish residential sector.
Energy Econ. 91, 104898 (2020).
69. Gugler, K. P., Haxhimusa,A. &Liebensteiner, M. Carbon Pricing and
Emissions: Causal Effects of Britain’s Carbon Tax. SSRN Electronic
Journal (2022). https://www.ssrn.com/abstract=4116240.
70. Colmer,J.,Martin,R.,Muûls,M.&Wagner,U.J.Doespricingcarbon
mitigate climate change? Firm-level evidence from the European
Unionemissionstradingscheme(2022).Publisher:CEPRDiscussion
Paper No. DP16982.
71. Fernández Fernández, Y., Fernández López, M., González Hernán-
dez, D. & Olmedillas Blanco, B. Institutional change and environ-
ment: Lessons from the European emission trading system.
Energies 11, 706 (2018).
72. Gupta, N., Shah, J., Gupta, S. & Kaul, R. Causal impact of european
union emission trading scheme on ﬁrm behaviour and economic
performance: A study of german manufacturing ﬁrms (2021).
https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.07163. Publisher: arXiv Version Num-
ber: 1.
73. Petrick,S.&Wagner,U.J.Theimpactofcarbontradingonindustry:
Evidence from german manufacturing ﬁrms. SSRN Electr. J. (2014).
http://www.ssrn.com/abstract=2389800.
74. Pawson, R., Greenhalgh, T., Harvey, G. & Walshe, K. Realist synth-
esis: an introduction. Manchester: ESRC Research Methods Pro-
gramme Working Paper Series, University of Manchester (2004).
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48512-w
Nature Communications|(2024)15:4147 1175. Pawson,R.,Greenhalgh,T.,Harvey, G. &Walshe, K.Realist review-a
new method of systematic review designed for complex policy
interventions. J. Health Serv. Res. policy 10, 21–34 (2005).
76. Vrolijk, K. & Sato, M. Quasi-experimental evidence on carbon pri-
cing. World Bank Res. Observer 38, 213–248 (2023).
77. Ferraro, P. J. et al. Create a culture of experiments in environmental
programs. Science 381, 735–737 (2023).
78. Koch,N.,Naumann,L.,Pretis,F.,Ritter,N.&Schwarz,M.Attributing
agnostically detected large reductions in road CO2 emissions to
policy mixes. Nat. Energy 7, 844–853 (2022).
79. Döbbeling, N. et al. Protocol: Effectiveness of carbon pricing - A
systematic review and meta-analysis of the ex-post literature
(2022). https://osf.io/854vp/. Publisher: Open Science Framework.
80. Callaghan, M., Müller-Hansen, F., Hilaire, J. & Lee, Y. T. NACSOS:
NLPAssistedClassiﬁcation,SynthesisandOnlineScreening(2020).
https://zenodo.org/record/4121526.
81. Sterne, J. A., Hernán, M. A., McAleenan, A., Reeves, B. C. & Higgins,
J. P. Assessing risk of bias in a non-randomized study. In Higgins, J.
P. et al. (eds.) Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Inter-
ventions, 621–641 (Wiley, 2019), 1 edn. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/10.1002/9781119536604.ch25.
82. Ringquist, E.Meta-analysis for public management and policy (John
Wiley & Sons, 2013).
83. Viechtbauer, W. Bias and efﬁciency of meta-analytic variance esti-
mators in the random-effects model. J. Educ. Behav. Stat. 30,
261–293 (2005).
84. Viechtbauer, W. Conducting Meta-Analyses in R with the metafor
Package. J. Stat. Softw. 36 (2010). http://www.jstatsoft.org/v36/
i03/.
85. Tipton, E. Small sample adjustments for robust variance estimation
with meta-regression. Psychol. Methods 20, 375–393 (2015).
86. Pustejovsky, J. E. & Tipton, E. Small-Sample Methods for Cluster-
Robust Variance Estimation and Hypothesis Testing in Fixed Effects
Models. J. Bus. Econ. Stat. 36, 672–683 (2018).
87. Stanley, T. D., Doucouliagos, H. & Ioannidis, J. P. A. Finding the
power to reduce publication bias: Finding the power to reduce
publication bias. Stat. Med. (2017). https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/10.1002/sim.7228.
88. Cohen, J. Some statistical issues in psychological research. Hand-
book of clinical psychology 95–121 (1965).
89. World Bank. Carbon Pricing Dashboard: Key statistics for 2022 on
initiatives implemented (2022). https://carbonpricingdashboard.
worldbank.org/map_data.
90. Raftery,A.E.,Madigan,D.&Hoeting,J.A.Bayesianmodelaveraging
for linear regression models. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 92, 179–191 (1997).
91. Bajzik, J., Havranek, T., Irsova, Z. & Schwarz, J. Estimating the
Armington elasticity: The importance of study design and publica-
tion bias. J. Int. Econ. 127, 103383 (2020).
92. Havranek, T., Rusnak, M. & Sokolova, A. Habit formation in con-
sumption: A meta-analysis. Eur. Econ. Rev. 95, 142–167 (2017).
93. Zeugner,S.& Feldkircher, M. Bayesian model averaging employing
ﬁxed and ﬂexible priors: The BMS Package for R. Journal of Statis-
tical Software 68 (2015). http://www.jstatsoft.org/v68/i04/.
94. Eicher, T. S., Papageorgiou, C. & Raftery, A. E. Default priors and
predictive performance in Bayesian model averaging, with appli-
cation to growth determinants. J. Appl. Econ. 26, 30–55 (2011).
95. Ley, E. & Steel, M. F. On the effect of prior assumptions in Bayesian
model averaging with applications to growth regression. J. Appl.
Econ. 24, 651–674 (2009).
96. Fernández, C., Ley, E. & Steel, M. F. Benchmark priors for Bayesian
model averaging. J. Econ. 100, 381–427 (2001).
97. Haddaway, N., Macura, B., Whaley, P. & Pullin, A. ROSES ﬂow dia-
gram for systematic reviews. Version 1.0 (2018). https://ﬁgshare.
com/articles/ROSES_Flow_Diagram_Version_1_0/5897389.
Acknowledgements
N.D.H. is supported by a PhD stipend from the Heinrich Böll Stiftung.
J.C.M, T.M.K., O.E., N.K., M.C., C.F., and M.K. acknowledge research
funding from the German Ministry of Education and Research (ARIADNE
project–Grant No. 03SFK5J0). J.C.M., K.M., and M.K. acknowledge
funding from theEuropean Union under the Horizon program (CAPABLE
project—Grant No. 101056891). Views and opinions expressed are
however those of the authors only.
Author contributions
J.C.M., N.D.H., K.M., T.M.K., O.E., N.K., W.F.L., N.O. and J.C.S. designed
the research. N.D.H., K.M., M.C. and J.C.M. developed the literature
screening strategy. N.D.H., K.M., M.B., N.K., W.F.L., N.O., J.C.S. and
J.C.M. manually screened the literature and N.D.H., K.M. and M.B.
extracted the data. N.D.H. and M.C. performed the machine learning-
enabled screening. N.D.H., K.M., T.M.K. and S.B.B. performed the meta-
analysis. T.M.K. and N.D.H. conducted the Bayesian Model Averaging
analysis. N.D.H., K.M., T.M.K., S.B.B., O.E., C.F., P.M.F., M.K., N.K., J.C.S.
andJ.C.M.analysedtheresults.N.D.H.,T.M.K.,J.C.M.andK.M.wrotethe
manuscript with contributions from all authors.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48512-w.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Niklas Döbbeling-Hildebrandt or Jan C. Minx.
Peer review information Nature Communications thanks the anon-
ymous reviewers for their contribution to the peer review of this work. A
peer review ﬁle is available.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
isdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder.Toviewacopyofthislicence,visithttp://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2024
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48512-w
Nature Communications|(2024)15:4147 12