SHS Web of Conferences 157, 02009 (2023) https://doi.org/10.1051/shsconf/202315702009
ESSC 2022
Research on the implementation of 1+X Certificate System in
Vocational Education reform
Xiuming Yue1, *, Hong Wang2, Wenhua Zhang3
1College of computer, Shandong Xiehe University, Shandong, China
2College of computer, Shandong Xiehe University, Shandong, China
3College of computer, Shandong Xiehe University, Shandong, China
Abstract: Since February 2019, “National Vocational Education Reform implementation program” sounded
the 1+X certificate system reform horn. The 1+X certificate system is an innovative design to promote the
transformation of the talent training mode in vocational education. It impels the reform of the type
development of vocational education, and it is also related to the promotion of the overall quality of talents in
the future and the establishment of the economic modernization system in our country. In the view of the
fuzzy-conflict theory, this paper reflects the causes of the present situation with the established ought-to-be
model of policy implementation, and obtains the causes of the present situation by grasping the overall
development direction. At present, the problems of resource passivity, planning backwardness and insufficient
function lead to the suspension of reform, and the difficulty of path dependence is difficult to surmount. In
order to Kalanchoe pinnata the floating 1+X certificate system, this paper combines the practice patterns and
their causes to return to the three dimensions of resources, planning and function, based on the relationship
between top-level design and bottom-level promotion, concept remolding and action breakthrough, supply
optimization and demand matching, to construct the 1+X certificate system, which is coordinated from top to
bottom, internal and external, left and right, to optimize the implementation practice strategy system.
1 INTRODUCTION
2 DESIGN AND RESEARCH
Since 2019, the 1+X certificate system has been a hot topic
in the field of vocational education research after the 1+X
This thesis follows the logic approach from macro-meso-
certificate system was launched as a pilot reform in the
micro, from theory-practical theory, and conducts a series
implementation plan of the state vocational education
of research on how to solve the main problem of 1+X
reform promulgated by the State Council. Now, the
certificate system.
construction blueprint of 1+X certificate system has been
(1) Research on the necessary execution Mode of 1+X
drawn, and higher vocational colleges also follow the top-
certificate System. Starting from the analysis of the
down or bottom-up policy implementation analysis path,
ambiguity and conflict of the text of 1+X certificate
and set up a special 1+X certificate system construction
system at the national macro level, the paper determines
team. Although the school in the country's strong call to
which kind of it belongs to administrative execution,
build a series of 1+X certificate system to match the
political execution, experimental execution and symbolic
implementation of the construction program and
execution, analyzes the key factors affecting the execution
personnel training program, but in the actual operation
mode, and then constructs the execution mode of the
process or maintain the traditional curriculum system,
required state from the macro, middle and micro levels.
teaching mode and evaluation methods, resulting in 1+X
(2) Research on Implementation effect of 1+X
certificate system implementation deviation.
certificate system. By interpreting the text of the 1+X
Therefore, the 1+X certificate system is defined in this
certificate system to clarify the policy objectives, and
study as supporting the formulation, evaluation,
constructing the evaluation indicators of the
recognition and issuance of “1” and “X” certificates.
implementation progress and effectiveness of the 1+X
Promote the organic integration of “1” certificate and “X”
certificate system according to the policy objectives and
certificate to link the world of education and the world of
the school's implementation perception, the questionnaire
work, diploma education and non-diploma education,
interview outline is formed to investigate the
school field and industry enterprises, individual learning
implementation effect of the 1+X certificate system in the
development and career development, which is composed
field of practice.
of informal constraints, formal rules and their
(3) Research on the action logic of the executive body
implementation mechanism.
of 1+X certificate system. For the provincial government,
Corresponding author: 153468148@qq.com
© The Authors, published by EDP Sciences. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the CreativeCommonsAttribution License 4.0
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
SHS Web of Conferences 157, 02009 (2023) https://doi.org/10.1051/shsconf/202315702009
ESSC 2022
which is the subject of implementation at the middle level, paper Outlines the appropriate mode of 1+X certificate
it mainly judges its action logic through the relevant policy system.
texts issued by it. For the school, which is the subject of (1) In the supply-oriented policy tools, the amount of
implementation at the micro level, it deeps into the research funding, teacher training, information
practical field to understand the reform status quo, infrastructure construction and policy preference are
dilemma and causes of the implementation of 1+X 13,9,5,2 respectively, the proportion of supply-oriented
certificate system in the aspects of teaching reform and policy tools was 48.83%, 31.03%, 17.24% and 6.90%,
management system. respectively.
(4) Research on Adjustment Strategy of 1+X (2) The number of environmental policy tools that are
certificate system executive body. Combined with the subject to research goal planning, management oversight,
appropriate policy implementation mode, review. And responsibility deployment, and resource coordination are
reflect on the middle level government and micro school 4,40,32, and 6, respectively, the proportion of
existing 1+X certificate system of the action logic, on this environmental policy instruments was 4.88%, 48.78%,
basis to put forward the effective implementation of 1+X 39.02% and 8.33% respectively. Thus, about half of the
certificate system countermeasures. environmental policies in the 1+X certification system are
in the category of management supervision, it reflects that
the national government departments and provinces (cities
3 AMBIGUITY AND CONFLICT RECOG
and districts) pay more attention to the process supervision
NITION OF 1+X CERTIFICATE SYSTE
of 1+X certification system.
M (3) In the demand-based policy tools, the study found
that the number of government purchase and assessment
of the number of protection were 1,10, in order in the
3.1 Analysis and research of 1+X system
demand-based policy tools accounted for 16.67%, 83.33%.
On the one hand, the government buys directly for schools
Content analysis, the aim is to reveal the hidden
and students, through the purchase of 1+X certificate
information in the policy text, and finally to see through
system assessment services, attracting professional social
the characteristics of the policy text through the corpus
organizations to participate in the construction of 1+X
data, by making objective and systematic Quantitative
certificate system, so as to continuously enhance the level
analysis of the 1+X certification scheme policies, such as
of professional skill level certificate assessment services.
the use of counting and recording procedures, and
quantitative description of the content of literal symbols in
the text. 3.3 Conflict identification of 1+X certificate
The specific steps of the analysis are as follows. Firstly, system
the text of 1+X certificate system is selected as the sample
of content analysis. Then, the policy tools, policy The 1+X certificate system spreads fast and strongly, and
objectives and policy subjects in the 1+X certification continues the traditional central and local transmission
system text are coded to define the analysis unit. In the mode. The variation of the policy text is small, and the
meantime, based on the main line of 1+X certificate policy text strictly follows the guiding ideology of the
system, this paper analyzes the content of special policies central policy-making body. On this basis, some regions
at the national level by sentence, adopts browse-coding make flexible adjustments. Each policy subject can obtain
method, and through layer-by-layer induction, looks for the growth point of interest in the 1+X certificate system,
the internal correlation and logical relationship of nodes and the values of some subjects converge. However, the
from the context it presents, and forms the model of ensuing question, such as whether the absence of conflicts
provincial-level policy reference text. Finally, the policy means that the 1+X certificate system can be effectively
text has been coded for the content of the elements of the enforced, is clearly not. First of all, the high intensity and
frequency statistics and analysis, in order to get the 1+X speed of the diffusion of 1+X certificate system, as well as
certificate system of fuzziness. the high similarity of policy evolvement, reflect the
administrative characteristics of local governments, which
failed to adjust policies to local conditions. In addition,
3.2 The fuzzy recognition of 1+X certificate
although through the analysis of the text of 1+X certificate
system
system, it is found that there is no obvious conflict of
interest among various policy subjects, in the complex
The premise of 1+X certificate system execution mode is
practice field, faced with changing situations, and the high
the fuzziness and conflict. Therefore, firstly, the fuzzy
ambiguity of 1+X certificate system itself, it is easy to
degree of policy is analyzed from the three dimensions of
generate action benefits among various executive subjects.
policy instruments, policy subjects and policy objectives,
Conflict of interest and structural conflict of interest.
and the conflict level of policy is analyzed from the three
Therefore, it is necessary to design the appropriate mode
dimensions of policy diffusion, policy evolution and
of execution according to the characteristics of 1+X
policy interests. Then, according to the analysis results,
certificate system.
based on the fuzzy-conflict theory, the paper determines
which policy implementation mode 1+X certificate
system belongs to, and explores the key factors affecting
the policy implementation. Based on the key factors, the
2
SHS Web of Conferences 157, 02009 (2023) https://doi.org/10.1051/shsconf/202315702009
ESSC 2022
4 THE CONSTRUCTION OF 1+X CERT atmosphere of internalized policy implementation,
IFICATE SYSTEM EXECUTION MODE evaluation, feedback and adjustment. In addition, it is
necessary to create a space environment filled with the
culture of change. Teachers and administrators with great
4.1 Resources are allocated on demand contributions will be awarded corresponding titles and set
as examples, which will be spread on the school's official
The resource demand investigation and the construction
website or wechat official account. With the theme of
channel solves the resource supply question, namely
cultural change, various activities such as curriculum
wants what and how to give. Resource efficiency focuses
reform and teaching skills competitions have been carried
on how to use it. As far as the allocative efficiency is
out.
concerned, first, we should strengthen the fund
management of 1+X certificate system. Scientific
quantification of project expenditure, emphasizing the 5 SUMMARY
rigidity of budget, and strict management of personnel
funds. Second, develop a scientific equipment acquisition In this paper, the policy subject is also included in the
plan. According to the requirement of 1+X certificate measurement dimension of policy text fuzziness, and a
system training and examination, the present situation of three-dimensional analysis framework of policy text
equipment in school and Shared Resource Bank, and the fuzziness is constructed. To enhance the Operability of
basic scheme of equipment configuration of 1+X analysis on the structural relationships and elements of the
certificate system training and examination practice, the policy texts involved in policy networks, a policy conflict
necessary equipment is supplemented by a cooperative analysis framework is established for policy diffusion,
enterprise or school. Third, formulate and improve the policy evolution and policy interests. Based on the 1+X
1+X certificate system, implement the relevant equipment certificate system attribute analysis system should follow
management and application system, inventory and the pattern, the present situation and the countermeasure,
Disposal Approval System, Performance Assessment and the combination of the macro-paradigm and the micro-
statistical reports. paradigm, has broken through the previous 1+X certificate
system research limitation, has widened the research
domain. The framework of fuzzy-conflict analysis, the
4.2 Optimize the quality according to local
1+X certification system should be implemented and the
conditions
implementation of the optimization strategy can be used
for reference.
Theoretically, due to the ambiguity of the 1+X certificate
system's objectives, tools and subjects, the policy
implementation situation is unclear and uncertain. In this Acknowledgement
case, the implementation of the 1+X certificate system
needs to give local policies flexibility, that is, give local The research project of Vocational Education Innovation
governments a certain autonomy to promote local and Development Highland Theory and practice of of
measures to ensure the effect of policy implementation. Shandong Xiehe University (XHXY202015)
However, in the practical situation, it is easy to have the
disordered and loose policy implementation caused by the
References
mismatch between policy flexibility and policy
implementation ability, which will eventually lead to the
1. Liting Chen, Shoubing Li. Analysis on the
implementation of 1+X certificate system, the
significance and practical problems of 1+X certificate
implementation goal and implementation action run
system implementation. Vocational and technical
counter to each other, or even the alienation of the
education. Vol 2,13-18(2020).
situation. Therefore, it is necessary to tighten the elasticity
2. Yu Chen, Xiaokun Sun. Study on the implementation
of policy appropriately, and ensure the trend of
mechanism of pilot policies in the perspective of
implementation by constraining local areas through the
policy ambiguity I-A case study based on the pilot
rigidity of scientific and reasonable policy performance
policies of low-carbon cities. Be realistic. Vol
indicators.
2,46(2020).
3. Shutong Cheng. Research on the synergetic
4.3 Innovative structures shape the environment
development of Qualifications Framework, credit
bank and 1+X certificate system. Vocational
The micro action structure of the execution of 1+X
Education Forum. Vol 12,38(2020).
certificate system is the strengthening of the responsibility
consciousness which promotes the initiation of the action 4. Yanqiang Cui, Yelin Wu. The system function and
ability of the end executive. We will create a feedback construction of higher vocational education degree in
space for the reform of the democratic and harmonious our country. Education research. Vol 36,84(2015).
1+X certificate system. Establish an information platform 5. Yizi Tang. 1+X Certificate System: Innovation o
for principals, middle-level cadres and professional f Vocational education system design in the Ne
teachers to communicate on an equal footing, facilitate all w era. China Vocational and Technical Educatio
subjects to put forward suggestions on the reform of 1+X n. Vol 16,5(2019).
certificate system in time, and achieve a virtuous circle
3
SHS Web of Conferences 157, 02009 (2023) https://doi.org/10.1051/shsconf/202315702009
ESSC 2022
6. Jian Zhao, Yaocheng Luo. Some thoughts and p ucation. Vocational Education Forum. Vol 7,149
reliminary practice on promoting the pilot work (2019).
of 1+X certificate system. China's vocational and 9. Mingguo Shao, Chuanwei Li. Research on the I
technical education. Vol 27,8(2019). ntegration of 1+X Certificate System and Higher
7. Xibao Lin, Jingbo Yu. 1+X certificate system un Vocational Personnel training Program. Journal o
der the higher vocational professional teaching st f Beijing Vocational College of Finance and Tra
andards and professional skills level standards in de. Vol 6,72(2019).
tegration research. Vocational Education study., 10. liting Chen, Shoubing Li. 1+X certificate system
Vol 1,11(2020). implementation significance and realistic problem
8. Xueqin Wang. The Origin, logic and Implementa analysis. Vocational and technical education.Vol
tion of 1+X Certificate System in Vocational Ed 27,18(2020).
4