Convex Optimization Learning Set Student Edition
Contents
1 Why modeling comes first 2
2 Standard form 3
3 Convex sets: the line-segment test 4
4 Convex functions: four recognition tools 5
4.1 Tool 1: known building blocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
4.2 Tool 2: second derivative or Hessian . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
4.3 Tool 3: epigraphs and sublevel sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
4.4 Tool 4: composition rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
5 Why local minima are global 7
6 Problem classes and solver structure 8
7 Disciplined convex programming 8
8 Mixed-media laboratory 9
9 Practice set 9
10Answer sketches 10
11Chapter summary 10
1Convex Optimization Learning Set Student Edition
Learning objectives
By the end of this chapter, you should be able to:
• translate an informal decision problem into variables, an objective, and con-
straints;
• rewrite a model in standard minimization form;
• decide whether sets and smooth functions are convex using line segments, Hes-
sians, epigraphs, and sublevel sets;
• use simple composition rules and recognize common formulation traps;
• identify linear programs (LPs), quadratic programs (QPs), second-order cone pro-
grams (SOCPs), and semidefinite programs (SDPs);
• check a basic model with Excel Solver and CVXPY’s disciplined convex program-
ming rules.
1 Why modeling comes first
Optimization begins before any solver runs. The model decides what counts as a decision,
what counts as success, and which restrictions are real. A perfectly executed algorithm
cannot rescue an incorrect formulation.
A useful modeling workflow is:
1. Name the decision variables. State units and allowed values.
2. Separate data from decisions. Prices, capacities, and observed measurements are
parameters, not variables.
3. Write one objective. Decide whether the goal is minimization or maximization.
4. Translate every restriction. Include signs, bounds, equalities, and logical assump-
tions.
5. Check dimensions and units. Adding dollars to kilograms is a modeling error, not a
math detail.
6. Classify the structure. Convexity and problem class guide the solution method.
Key idea: A model is an argument
A strong formulation makes a claim: among all decisions that satisfy the constraints,
the objective correctly ranks what is better. Before solving, ask whether that claim
matches the real decision.
2Convex Optimization Learning Set Student Edition
2 Standard form
A broad convex optimization problem is commonly written as
min
x∈Rn
f0(x)
subject to fi(x) ≤ 0, i = 1,...,m,
Ax = b,
where the objective f0 and inequality functions fi are convex, while the equality constraints
are affine.
The form is flexible:
• maximize u(x) by minimizing −u(x);
• rewrite g(x) ≥ 0 as −g(x) ≤ 0;
• rewrite ℓ ≤ xj ≤ u as ℓ − xj ≤ 0 and xj − u ≤ 0;
• preserve affine equalities as equalities rather than replacing them with two inequalities
unless a solver interface requires it.
Worked example: Production planning from narrative to LP
A workshop can make tables (x1) and shelves (x2). Each table uses 2 labor hours and
1 unit of wood. Each shelf uses 1 labor hour and 1 unit of wood. At most 6 labor
hours and 4 wood units are available. Profit is 3 units per table and 2 per shelf.
Step 1: decisions. x1,x2 are nonnegative production quantities.
Step 2: objective. Maximize 3x1 + 2x2, or equivalently minimize −3x1 − 2x2.
Step 3: resources.
2x1 + x2 ≤ 6, x1 + x2 ≤ 4, x1,x2 ≥ 0.
Step 4: classify. The objective and every constraint are affine, so this is an LP .
Step 5: solve geometrically. A linear objective reaches an optimum at a vertex of a
nonempty bounded polyhedron. Evaluating the vertices gives the optimum (x1,x2) =
(2,2) with profit 10.
3Convex Optimization Learning Set Student Edition
Figure 1: The feasible region is the shaded polygon. The best objective contour touches
it at the starred vertex.
Common mistake: Leaving assumptions implicit
If production must be integral, the model is a mixed-integer program rather than a
convex LP . Convexity depends on the feasible set, not only on the formula printed in
the objective.
3 Convex sets: the line-segment test
A set C ⊆ Rn is convex when
θx + (1 − θ)y ∈ C for all x,y ∈ C and θ ∈ [0,1].
Geometrically, every line segment joining two feasible points remains feasible.
4Convex Optimization Learning Set Student Edition
Figure 2: The line-segment test distinguishes a convex set from a disconnected nonconvex
set.
Important convex sets include:
• affine sets {x : Ax = b};
• halfspaces {x : aT x ≤ b};
• norm balls {x : ∥x∥ ≤ r};
• polyhedra, which are intersections of finitely many halfspaces and affine sets;
• the positive semidefinite cone Sn
+ = {X = XT : X ⪰ 0}.
Key idea: Intersection rule
Any intersection of convex sets is convex. This explains why a feasible set built from
many convex inequalities and affine equalities remains convex.
Checkpoint: Convex-set recognition
Decide whether each set is convex.
1. {x ∈ R2 : x1 + x2 ≤ 3, x1 ≥ 0}
2. {x ∈ R2 : ∥x∥2 = 1}
3. {x ∈ R2 : ∥x∥2 ≤ 1}
Answers: (1) yes, an intersection of halfspaces; (2) no, the sphere excludes interior
points of chords; (3) yes, a norm ball.
4 Convex functions: four recognition tools
A function f : C → R on a convex domain is convex if
f(θx + (1 − θ)y) ≤ θf(x) + (1 − θ)f(y).
This says the function lies below every chord joining two points on its graph.
5Convex Optimization Learning Set Student Edition
4.1 Tool 1: known building blocks
Affine functions, norms, exponentials, maxima of affine functions, and nonnegative weighted
sums of convex functions are convex. Negative logarithms are convex on positive argu-
ments.
4.2 Tool 2: second derivative or Hessian
For a twice-differentiable scalar function, f′′(x) ≥ 0 on an interval implies convexity. For
f : Rn → R, convexity follows when
∇2
f(x) ⪰ 0 for every x in the domain.
For a quadratic f(x) = 1
2xT Px + qT x + r, the Hessian is P. The quadratic is convex exactly
when the symmetric part of P is positive semidefinite.
Worked example: Ridge regression is a convex QP
Given a design matrix A, observations b, and λ ≥ 0, ridge regression solves
min
x
∥Ax − b∥2
2 + λ∥x∥2
2 .
Expanding shows a quadratic Hessian
2AT
A + 2λI ⪰ 0.
Therefore the objective is convex. When AT A+λI ≻ 0, the objective is strictly convex
and the minimizer is unique:
x∗
= (AT
A + λI)−1
AT
b.
The inverse formula is useful conceptually, but numerical solvers use linear-system
methods rather than explicitly forming an inverse.
4.3 Tool 3: epigraphs and sublevel sets
The epigraph of f is
epif = {(x,t) : f(x) ≤ t}.
A function is convex exactly when its epigraph is convex. In addition, every sublevel set
{x : f(x) ≤ α} of a convex function is convex.
6Convex Optimization Learning Set Student Edition
Figure 3: Epigraphs provide a geometric definition of convex functions; sublevel sets
connect functions to feasible regions.
4.4 Tool 4: composition rules
Safe composition rules prevent plausible-looking but invalid arguments.
• If h is convex and nondecreasing, and g is convex, then h ◦ g is convex.
• If h is convex and nonincreasing, and g is concave, then h ◦ g is convex.
• Affine composition preserves convexity: f(Ax + b) is convex whenever f is convex.
Common mistake: “Convex inside convex” is not a rule
The composition of two convex functions need not be convex. Monotonicity and do-
main information matter. For example, h(u) = u2 is convex but not globally nonde-
creasing, so h(g(x)) cannot be certified from convexity of g alone.
5 Why local minima are global
Suppose f is convex and C is convex. Let x∗ be a local minimizer. If some y ∈ C had
f(y) < f(x∗), then for sufficiently small θ > 0, the point
z = (1 − θ)x∗
+ θy
would remain arbitrarily close to x∗ and feasible. Convexity would give
f(z) ≤ (1 − θ)f(x∗
) + θf(y) < f(x∗
),
contradicting local optimality. Therefore every local minimizer is global.
Key idea: What convexity buys you
Convexity does not automatically make computation easy, but it removes deceptive
local minima and gives strong optimality certificates. That changes both theory and
algorithm design.
7Convex Optimization Learning Set Student Edition
6 Problem classes and solver structure
LP: affine objective and affine constraints
QP: convex quadratic objective with affine constraints
SOCP: affine terms plus second-order cone constraints
SDP: affine matrix expressions constrained to be PSD
Increasing expressive power
and specialized structure
Class Canonical pattern Typical applications
LP mincT x subject to Ax = b, Gx ≤ h production, transport, allocation
QP min 1
2xT Px + qT x with P ⪰ 0 regression, portfolio design, control
SOCP ∥Aix + bi∥2 ≤ cT
i x + di robust optimization, engineering de-
sign
SDP F0 +
∑
i xiFi ⪰ 0 control, relaxations, matrix completion
Worked example: A robust linear inequality becomes an SOCP
Suppose an uncertain coefficient is a = ā + u with ∥u∥2 ≤ ρ. Requiring
aT
x ≤ b for every allowed u
is equivalent to
āT
x + ρ∥x∥2 ≤ b.
The worst perturbation aligns with x, since max∥u∥≤ρ uT x = ρ∥x∥2. The resulting norm
inequality is convex and has SOCP form.
7 Disciplined convex programming
Disciplined convex programming (DCP) is a rule system that verifies a model by tracking
the curvature and sign of every expression. DCP is conservative: an expression can be
mathematically convex yet fail the syntactic check until it is rewritten.
For example,
√
1 + x2 is convex. A direct expression such as sqrt(1 + square(x)) may
not pass a DCP checker because the outer square root is concave and increasing. The
equivalent norm form √
1 + x2 = ∥(1,x)∥2
is recognized immediately.
Listing 1: CVXPY check for a convex quadratic program
import cvxpy as cp
8Convex Optimization Learning Set Student Edition
import numpy as np
x = cp.Variable(4)
A = np.array([[1., 2., 0., 1.],
[0., 1., 1., 0.]])
b = np.array([1., 0.5])
lam = 0.2
problem = cp.Problem(
cp.Minimize(cp.sum_squares(A @ x - b) + lam * cp.sum_squares(x)),
[x >= 0]
)
print(problem.is_dcp()) # True
problem.solve()
print(problem.value, x.value)
8 Mixed-media laboratory
Mixed-media lab: Excel Solver: graphical LP
Create cells for x1, x2, profit, labor used, and wood used. Configure Solver as follows:
• objective: maximize profit 3x1 + 2x2;
• changing cells: x1,x2;
• constraints: 2x1 + x2 ≤ 6, x1 + x2 ≤ 4, and nonnegativity;
• method: Simplex LP .
Then change profit coefficients and record when the optimal vertex changes. The
chart should update automatically.
Mixed-media lab: PSD checker for a 2 × 2 matrix
For P =
[
a b
b c
]
, create cells for a,b,c. A symmetric 2 × 2 matrix is PSD exactly when
a ≥ 0, c ≥ 0, and ac − b2 ≥ 0. Use conditional formatting to label the quadratic convex
or nonconvex. Compare this rule with Excel’s eigenvalue output if available.
9 Practice set
Easy
1. Rewrite maxx logx subject to 1 ≤ x ≤ 4 as a minimization problem.
2. Is the intersection of two norm balls convex? Explain in one sentence.
3. Classify min4x1 + 7x2 subject to affine equalities and inequalities.
9Convex Optimization Learning Set Student Edition
Medium
4. Determine whether f(x) = x4 is convex on R.
5. Show that f(x) = max{2x − 1,−x + 3} is convex.
6. Put ∥Ax − b∥2 ≤ t into a recognizable conic form and name the class.
Hard
7. Prove that every sublevel set of a convex function is convex.
8. A covariance matrix Σ is PSD. Prove that xT Σx is convex and explain why this matters
in portfolio optimization.
9. Find a convex reformulation of minx maxi(aT
i x+bi) by introducing an epigraph variable.
10 Answer sketches
1. Minimize −logx with constraints 1 − x ≤ 0 and x − 4 ≤ 0.
2. Yes. Each ball is convex and intersections preserve convexity.
3. LP .
4. f′′(x) = 12x2 ≥ 0.
5. A pointwise maximum of affine functions is convex.
6. ∥Ax − b∥2 ≤ t is a second-order cone constraint; the problem is an SOCP when the
remaining pieces fit.
7. For x,y in the sublevel set, convexity gives f(θx + (1 − θ)y) ≤ θf(x) + (1 − θ)f(y) ≤ α.
8. The Hessian is 2Σ ⪰ 0. Variance is therefore a convex risk term.
9. Introduce t, minimize t, and require aT
i x + bi ≤ t for every i.
11 Chapter summary
• Standard form separates the objective, convex inequalities, and affine equalities.
• Convex sets pass the line-segment test; convex functions satisfy the chord inequality.
• Hessians, epigraphs, sublevel sets, and composition rules form a practical recognition
toolkit.
• LP , QP , SOCP , and SDP structure determines which solver technology is appropriate.
• DCP makes modeling discipline computationally checkable.
10