RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
For numbered affiliations see
end of the article
Correspondence to: G S Collins
gary.collins@csm.ox.ac.uk
(or @GSCollins onTwitter;
ORCID 0000-0002-2772-2316)
Additional material is published
online only. To view please visit
the journal online.
Citethisas:BMJ2024;385:e078378
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/
bmj-2023-078378
Accepted: 17 January 2024
TRIPOD+AI statement: updated guidance for reporting
clinical prediction models that use regression or machine
learning methods
GaryS Collins,1
Karel G M Moons,2
Paula Dhiman,1
Richard D Riley,3,4
Andrew L Beam,5
Ben Van Calster,6,7
Marzyeh Ghassemi,8
Xiaoxuan Liu,9,10
Johannes B Reitsma,2
Maarten van Smeden,2
Anne-Laure Boulesteix,11
Jennifer Catherine Camaradou,12,13
Leo Anthony Celi,14,15,16
Spiros Denaxas,17,18
Alastair K Denniston,4,9
Ben Glocker,19
Robert M Golub,20
Hugh Harvey,21
Georg Heinze,22
Michael M Hoffman,23,24,25,26
André Pascal Kengne,27
Emily Lam,12
Naomi Lee,28
Elizabeth W Loder,29,30
Lena Maier-Hein,31
Bilal A Mateen,17,32,33
Melissa D McCradden,34,35
Lauren Oakden-Rayner,36
Johan Ordish,37
Richard Parnell,12
Sherri Rose,38
Karandeep Singh,39
Laure Wynants,40
Patricia Logullo1
TheTRIPOD (TransparentReporting ofa
multivariable prediction modelfor
IndividualPrognosisOr Diagnosis)
statementwaspublishedin 2015 to
provide the minimum reporting
recommendationsfor studies
developing or evaluating the
performance ofa prediction model.
Methodologicaladvancesin the fieldof
prediction have since includedthe
widespreaduse ofartificialintelligence
(AI) poweredbymachine learning
methodsto develop prediction models.
An update to theTRIPOD statementis
thusneeded.TRIPOD+AI provides
harmonisedguidance for reporting
prediction modelstudies, irrespective
ofwhether regression modelling or
machine learning methodshave been
used.The new checklistsupersedesthe
TRIPOD 2015 checklist, which should
no longer be used.Thisarticle
describesthe developmentof
TRIPOD+AI andpresentsthe expanded
27 item checklistwith more detailed
explanation ofeach reporting
recommendation, andtheTRIPOD+AI
for Abstractschecklist.TRIPOD+AI aims
to promote the complete, accurate, and
transparentreporting ofstudiesthat
develop a prediction modelor evaluate
itsperformance. Complete reporting
willfacilitate studyappraisal, model
evaluation, andmodelimplementation.
Prediction models are used across diﬀerent healthcare
settings. They are used to estimate an outcome value
or risk. Most models estimate the probability of the
presence of a particular health condition (diagnostic)
orwhetheraparticularoutcomewilloccurinthefuture
(prognostic).1
Their primary use is to support clinical
decision making, such as whether to refer patients
for further testing, monitor disease deterioration or
treatment eﬀects, or initiate treatment or lifestyle
changes. Examples of well known prediction models
include EuroSCORE II (cardiac surgery),2
the Gail
model (breast cancer),3
the Framingham risk score
(cardiovascular disease),4
IMPACT (traumatic brain
injury),5
and FRAX (osteoporotic and hip fractures).6
Prediction models are abundant in the biomedical
literature, with thousands of models published
annually(andincreasing),andhavebeendevelopedfor
many outcomes and health conditions.7 8
At least 731
diagnostic and prognostic prediction model studies on
covid-19 were published during the first 12 months
of the pandemic.9
Despite this interest in developing
prediction models, there have been longstanding
SUMMARY POINTS
There has been considerable interest and financial investment in developing
prediction models by applying artificial intelligence (AI) methods, typically
powered by advances in machine learning
To ensure that a prediction model study is valuable to users, authors should
prepare a transparent, complete, and accurate account of why the research was
done, what they did, and what they found
An update of the TRIPOD (Transparent Reporting of a multivariable prediction
model for Individual Prognosis Or Diagnosis) statement aims to harmonise
the landscape of prediction model studies using AI methods and to provide
guidance regardless of whether regression models or machine learning methods
have been used
The TRIPOD+AI statement consists of a 27 item checklist, an expanded checklist
that details reporting recommendations for each item, and a TRIPOD+AI for
Abstracts checklist containing 13 items
TRIPOD+AI aims to assist authors in the complete reporting of their study and
help peer reviewers, editors, policymakers, end users, and patients understand
the data, methods, findings and conclusions of AI driven research
Adherence to the TRIPOD+AI reporting recommendations could encourage the
improved use of research time, effort, and money
thebmj|BMJ2024;385:e078378 | doi: 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378 1
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
. by guest on 23 July 2026 https://www.bmj.com/ Downloaded from 16 April 2024. 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378 on BMJ: first published asRESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
concerns about transparency and completeness of
reporting in the field,10 11
and the resulting usability.
For readers (including peer reviewers, editors, health
professionals, regulators, patients, and the general
public), incomplete or inaccurate reporting impairs
the ability to critically appraise the study design
and methods, have confidence in the findings, and
further evaluate or implement a prediction model.
Poor reporting of a model might also mask flaws in the
design, data collection, or conduct of a study that, if
the model was implemented in the clinical pathway,
could cause harm. Harm can be perceived to occur
when insuﬃcient measures are in place to mitigate
bias. Better reporting can create more trust and
influence patient and public acceptability of the use
of prediction models in healthcare. Authors have an
ethicalandscientificobligationtohonestlyreporttheir
research in a complete and transparent manner. As
noted by the late Doug Altman and colleagues, “Good
reporting is not an optional extra; it is an essential
component of research”12
—anything less is little more
than avoidable research waste.13
In response to concerns about incomplete
reporting,10 11 14 15
the TRIPOD (Transparent Reporting
of a multivariable model for Individual Prognosis
Or Diagnosis) statement was published in 2015
(TRIPOD 2015) to provide minimum reporting
recommendations.16 17
TRIPOD 2015 comprises a
checklist of 37 items, which includes 25 items to
report in both development and validation studies,
and an additional six items for model development
studies and six items for validation studies.
Accompanying the checklist is an explanation and
elaboration document that provides the rationale
behind each reporting item; published examples of
good reporting; and a discussion of issues relating to
the design, conduct, and analysis of prediction model
studies.17
TRIPOD 2015 mainly focused on models
developed using regression modelling, which was the
prevailing approach at the time. Additional guidance
has since been created for reporting abstracts of
prediction model studies (TRIPOD for Abstracts18
),
studies developing or validating prediction models
using clustered data (TRIPOD-Cluster19 20
), systematic
reviews and meta-analyses of prediction model studies
(TRIPOD-SRMA21
), and guidance in preparation for
study protocols (TRIPOD-P22
). All available guidance,
as well as template checklists for filling out separately,
can also be found on the TRIPOD website (https://
www.tripod-statement.org/).
Since the publication of TRIPOD 2015, there
have been numerous methodological advances
in prediction modelling, including sample size
guidance for developing models23-27
and evaluating
their performance,28-32
and greater recognition of
operationalising fairness,33
reproducibility,34
and
adopting open science principles.35
However, interest
andfinancialinvestmentinapplyingmethodsascribed
to artificial intelligence (AI), typically powered by
advances in machine learning methods (eg, random
forests, deep learning), is where we have seen the
most progress and change. With increasing access to
data and availability of oﬀ-the-shelf software to apply
machine learning methods, developing a prediction
model has become faster and easier. Vast numbers
of prediction models are now entering the scientific
literature for many clinical settings, and for a wide
rangeofoutcomesandhealthconditions,withmultiple
models often available for the same outcome, health
condition, and target population.7 8 36
The ability to
critically evaluate the quality of prediction models and
understand their ability to serve well in a particular
setting or for a particular use case is therefore of even
greater critical importance. This ability is predicated
on complete and transparent reporting.
However, systematic reviews evaluating studies of
predictionmodelshaveshownthattheyareoftenpoorly
conducted (including deficiencies in study design or
data collection37 38
); use poor methodology37 38
; are
incompletely reported with key details missing39-54
;
are consequently at high risk of bias41 49 55-57
; rarely
adhere to open science practices,58
and are susceptible
to overinterpretation or so-called spin.59 60
These
deficiencies cast considerable doubt on models’
usefulness and safety, and raises concerns about their
potentialtocreateorwidenhealthcaredisparities.61
While
TRIPOD2015islargelyagnostictothetypeofmodelling
approach, and much of its reporting recommendations
apply equally to non-regression approaches, additional
reporting considerations are needed for the growing
class of machine learning methods. For example, unlike
regression based models, the flexibility and complexity
underpinning other machine learning approaches
typically means that the resulting prediction models do
not result in a simple equation and sometimes even the
predictors used remain unclear. Additional reporting
considerationsarethereforeneededthatarenotcurrently
covered in TRIPOD 2015. Alongside methodological
advancements, considerations of fairness,62
wider
acceptance of open science practices,63
and public and
patient involvement in research and implementation of
research,64 65
an update to the TRIPOD 2015 statement
is needed to capture these developments and the
consequencesforreporting.
The aim of this paper is to describe the development
of the updated TRIPOD guidance, present the new
TRIPOD+AI checklist, and discuss how to use it.
TRIPOD+AI aims to harmonise the landscape of
prediction model studies and provide guidance
regardless of whether regression models or machine
learning methods have been used.66
The “+” in
TRIPOD+AI indicates that it provides consolidated
reporting recommendations for studies of prediction
models developed using regression modelling or
machine learning (ie, deep learning, random forests)
approaches. We also use the additional term “AI” to
be consistent with existing reporting guidelines for
studies broadly labelled as involving AI. However,
for readability, this article will refer to the methods
underpinning them as machine learning (table 1). A
glossary of terms (box 1) clarifies key concepts used
within the TRIPOD+AI reporting guideline.
2 doi: 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378|BMJ2024;385:e078378 | thebmj
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
. by guest on 23 July 2026 https://www.bmj.com/ Downloaded from 16 April 2024. 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378 on BMJ: first published asRESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
Development of TRIPOD+AI
We describe the development of the TRIPOD+AI
statement, a guideline to aid the reporting of studies
developingpredictionmodelsfordiagnosisorprognosis
using machine learning or regression methods or
evaluating (validating) their performance. There is no
such thing as a validated prediction model.76
To avoid
ambiguity and harmonise terminology, we refer to
validationasevaluation74
inthisarticle(box1).Existing
reporting guidelines and those in development for
reporting other types of biomedical studies involving
a machine learning component are detailed in table 1.
Literature reviews and consensus exercises were used
to develop the TRIPOD+AI checklist as recommended
by the EQUATOR Network.77
A steering group was
convened by GSC and KGMM to oversee the guideline
development process, with members selected to cover
a broad range of expertise and experience (comprising
GSC, KGMM, RDR, ALB, JBR, BVC, XL, and PD).
In April 2019, a commentary was published
announcing the TRIPOD+AI initiative.78
The guideline
was registered as a reporting guideline under
development with the EQUATOR Network on 7 May
2019 (https://www.equator-network.org/). A study
protocol was made available on 25 March 2021 on
the Open Science Framework (https://osf.io/zyacb/),
describingtheprocessandmethodsusedtodevelopthe
TRIPOD+AI reporting guideline. The protocol, which
alsodescribesthedevelopmentofaqualityassessment
and risk-of-bias tool for prediction models developed
using machine learning methods (PROBAST+AI), was
published in 2021.79
The reporting of the consensus
basedmethodsusedinthedevelopmentofTRIPOD+AI
followed the ACCORD (Accurate Consensus Reporting
Document) recommendations.80
Ethics
This study was approved by the Central University
research ethics committee, University of Oxford on
10 December 2020 (R73034/RE001). Participant
information was provided to the Delphi survey
participants electronically before starting the survey
andtotheconsensusparticipantsbeforetheconsensus
meeting. Delphi survey participants provided
electronic informed consent before completing the
survey.
Candidate item list generation
An initial list of items was drafted by GSC and KGMM
using TRIPOD 2015.16 17
Additional items were
identified from TRIPOD-Cluster,19 20
TRIPOD for
Abstracts,18
CAIR,81
MI-CLAIM,82
CLAIM,68
MINIMAR,83
SPIRIT-AI,71
and CONSORT-AI,72
along with additional
literature identified by the steering group.34 84-89
The list
ofitems was also informed by thefindings of systematic
reviews evaluating the reporting, methods, and
overinterpretation of prediction model studies using
machine learning.37-39 48 51 54 59 60
The steering group
harmonised the initial list of items to form a final list of
65 unique candidate items covering the title (one item);
abstract(oneitem);introduction(threeitems);methods
(37 items); results (15 items); discussion (five items),
and other (three items). This list was used in a modified
Delphi exercise as described below.
Recruitment of Delphi panellists
Delphi participants were identified by the steering
committee, from authors of relevant publications
via a call to participate on social media (eg, Twitter),
and through personal recommendations. Including
experts recommended by other Delphi participants.
The steering group identified participants to achieve
geographical and disciplinary diversity and include
key stakeholder groups, for example, researchers
(statisticians/data scientists, epidemiologists,
machine learning researchers/scientists, clinicians,
radiologists, and ethicists), healthcare professionals,
journal editors, funders, policymakers, healthcare
regulators, patients, and the general public as end
users of prediction models from a range of settings
(eg, universities, hospitals, primary care, biomedical
journals, non-profit organisations, and for-profit
organisations).
No minimum sample size was placed on the number
of Delphi participants. A steering group member
checked the expertise or experience of each identified
person. Individuals were then invited to participate
via email and were sent an information pack with the
study description, aims, and contact details. Once
participants accepted, they were added to the Delphi
panel and received the link to the survey. Delphi
panellists did not receive any financial incentive or gift
to participate.
Table 1 | Reporting guidelines for healthcare studies using machine learning
Reporting guideline Scope
STARD-AI Studies evaluating the diagnostic accuracy of an artificial intelligence based test (in preparation)67
TRIPOD+AI Studies developing or evaluating the performance of a prediction model, using artificial intelligence, including machine learning methods
CLAIM Medical imaging studies using artificial intelligence68
DECIDE-AI Early stage clinical evaluation (including safety, human factors evaluation) of decision support systems driven by artificial intelligence69
CHEERS-AI Studies describing health economic evaluations to estimate the value for money (cost effectiveness) of artificial intelligence interventions70
SPIRIT-AI Protocols for clinical trials evaluating an intervention with an artificial intelligence component71
CONSORT-AI Clinical trial reports evaluating an intervention with an artificial intelligence component72
PRISMA-AI Systematic reviews and meta-analyses of artificial intelligence interventions (in preparation)73
STARD=Standards for Reporting of Diagnostic Accuracy; TRIPOD=Transparent Reporting of a multivariable prediction model for Individual Prognosis Or Diagnosis; AI=artificial intelligence;
CLAIM=Checklist for Artificial Intelligence in Medical Imaging; DECIDE=Decisions in health Care to Introduce or Diffuse innovations using Evidence; CHEERS=Consolidated Health Economic
Evaluation Reporting Standards; SPIRIT=Standard Protocol Items: Recommendations for Interventional Trials; CONSORT=Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials; PRISMA=Preferred Reporting
Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses.
thebmj|BMJ2024;385:e078378 | doi: 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378 3
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
. by guest on 23 July 2026 https://www.bmj.com/ Downloaded from 16 April 2024. 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378 on BMJ: first published asRESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
Delphi process
The Delphi surveys were designed and delivered
electronically using the Welphi online platform (www.
welphi.com) to be responded to individually, online,
and in English. The platform ensures responses are
anonymousbysendingadiﬀerentlinktoeachparticipant
and applying codes to respondents. The panellists
received a package of information clarifying the study’s
Box 1: Glossary of terms used in TRIPOD+AI
ThedefinitionsanddescriptionsgivenbelowrelatetothespecificcontextoftheTRIPOD+AI*guideline;theydonotnecessarilyapplytootherareas
ofresearch.
Artificialintelligence
Fieldofcomputersciencethatfocusesondevelopingmodelsandalgorithmscapableofperformingtasksthattypicallyrequirehumanintelligence.
Calibration
Agreementbetweenobservedoutcomesandestimatedvaluesfromthemodel.Calibrationisbestassessedgraphicallywithaplotoftheestimated
valuesonthexaxisandobservedvaluesontheyaxis,withasmoothedflexiblecalibrationcurveintheindividualdata.
Carepathway
Structuredandcoordinatedplanofcareformanagingaspecifichealthconditionordealingwithapatient’shealthcareneedsthroughouttheir
healthcarejourney.
Classimbalance
Whenthefrequencyofindividualswithandwithouttheoutcomeeventisunequal.
Discrimination
Howwellthepredictionsfromthemodeldifferentiatebetweenindividualswithandwithouttheoutcome.Discriminationistypicallyquantifiedbythe
cstatistic(sometimesreferredtoastheareaunderthecurve(AUC)orareaunderthereceiveroperatingcharacteristics(AUROC))forbinaryoutcomes,
andthecindexfortime-to-eventoutcomes.
Evaluationortestdata
Datausedtoestimatetheperformanceofapredictionmodel,sometimesreferredtoastestdataorvalidationdata.†Evaluationdatashouldbe
distinctfromthedatausedtotrainthemodel,tunehyperparameters,ordomodelselection,suchthatthereisnooverlapinparticipantsbetweenthe
trainingandevaluationdata.Evaluationdatashouldberepresentativeofthepopulationinwhomthemodelistobeused.
Fairness
Propertyofpredictionmodelsthatdonotdiscriminateagainstindividualsorgroupsofindividualsbasedonattributessuchasage,race/ethnicity,
sex/gender,orsocioeconomicstatus.
Hyperparameters
Valuesthatcontrolthemodeldevelopmentorlearningprocess.
Hyperparametertuning
Findingthebest(hyper)parametersettingsforaparticularmodelbuildingstrategy.
Internalvalidation
Evaluatingtheperformanceofapredictionmodelonthesamepopulationonwhichthemodelwasdeveloped(eg,traintestsplit,crossvalidation,or
bootstrapping).
Machinelearning
Asubfieldofartificialintelligencethatfocusesondevelopingmodelscapableoflearningandmakingpredictionsordecisionsfromdata,without
beingexplicitlyprogrammed.
Modelevaluation
Evaluatingpredictiveaccuracyofamodelbyestimatingmodeldiscrimination(eg,cstatistic),modelcalibration(eg,calibrationplot,calibration
slope),andclinicalutility(eg,decisioncurveanalysis).Thisprocessisreferredtoasevaluatingapredictionmodel.7475
Outcome
Diagnosticorprognosticeventthatisbeingpredicted.Inmachinelearning,thiseventisoftenreferredtoasthetargetvalue,responsevariable,orlabel.
Predictor
Characteristicthatcanbemeasuredorattributedatanindividuallevel(eg,age,systolicbloodpressure,sex,diseasestage,radiomicsfeatures)or
grouplevel(eg,country).Itisalsooftenreferredtoasaninput,feature,independentvariable,orcovariate.
Trainingordevelopmentdata
Datausedtotrainordevelopapredictionmodel.Thetrainingdataareideallyrepresentativeofthepopulationinwhomthemodelistobeused.
*TRIPOD=TransparentReportingofamultivariablepredictionmodelforIndividualPrognosisOrDiagnosis;AI=artificialintelligence.
†Validationdataoftenhasdifferentmeanings.Forexample,inmachinelearningstudies,validationdatacanrefertodatausedforparametertuningordatausedto
evaluatemodelperformance(oftenreferredtoasexternalvalidation).Toavoidanyambiguity,werefertodatausedtoevaluatemodelperformanceasevaluationdata.
4 doi: 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378|BMJ2024;385:e078378 | thebmj
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
. by guest on 23 July 2026 https://www.bmj.com/ Downloaded from 16 April 2024. 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378 on BMJ: first published asRESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
objectives and scope and explaining how to participate,
use the platform, and contact the development team
withanyquestions.Participantswereaskedtorateeach
itemas“canbeomitted,”“possiblyinclude,”“desirable
for inclusion,” or “essential for inclusion.” Participants
were also invited to comment on any item, and to
suggest new items. Free text responses were collated
andanalysedbyPL.Thethemesgeneratedwereusedby
GSC and KGMM to inform item rephrasing, merging, or
suggestingnewitems.Allmembersofthesteeringgroup
were invited to participate in the Delphi surveys.
Round 1 participants
The invitation and participation link was sent to 292
people. The first round was conducted between 19
April 2021 and 13 May 2021. A reminder message
was sent on 5 May 2021. Of 292 people invited, 170
completed the survey, including eight who provided
partial responses. Survey participants came from 22
countries, predominantly the UK (n=52), US (n=31),
Netherlands (n=23), and Canada (n=20), representing
five continents (Europe: 100, South America: 2,
North America: 51, Australasia: 4, Asia: 13). Seven
participants did not declare their country.
Participants reported their primary fields of
research/work and could select more than one field.
They indicated statistics and data science (n=70),
AI or machine learning (n=69), clinical (n=50) or
epidemiology (n=40), prediction (n=18), radiology
(n=18), health policy/regulatory (n=10), biomedical
research (n=7), journal editor (n=6), meta-research/
reporting (n=6), pathology (n=2), funder (n=2), ethics
(n=2), technology development/implementation (n=2),
genetics/genomics (n=2), biomedical engineering
(n=2), and health economics (n=2).
Round 2 participants
The second round of the Delphi was conducted
between 16 December 2021 and 17 January 2022.
All participants who completed the first Delphi
round were invited to the second Delphi round.
Additional participants who did not respond to round
1 were reinvited, as were participants identified or
recommended after round 1. Invitations for round
2 were sent to 395 people, of whom 200 completed
the survey, including 15 who provided partial
responses. Survey participants came from 27 diﬀerent
countries, again predominantly the UK (n=70), US
(n=37), Netherlands (n=19), and Canada (n=19),
and represented six continents (Europe: 123, South
America: 3, North America: 56, Australasia: 7, Asia:
10, Africa: 1). Participants reported their primary
fields of research/work and could select more than one
field: statistics and data science (n=78), AI or machine
learning (n=72), clinical (n=49) or epidemiology
(n=51), prediction (n=19), radiology (n=26), health
policy (n=12), biomedical research (n=14), journal
editor (n=13), meta-research/reporting (n=6),
biomedical engineering (n=5), funder (n=2), genetics/
genomics (n=4), patient representative/engagement
(n=3), health economics (n=2), and ethics (n=1).
Checklist item evolution from round 1 to round 2
In round 1 of the modified Delphi, participants rated
65 initial candidate items generated from literature
reviews and other reporting checklists, as described
above. Agreement was considered when the individuals
agreedanitemwasdesirableoressentialforinclusion.As
defined in the protocol,79
items with agreement of 70%
or higher were carried over to round 2. Items that had an
agreement rate lower than 70% were excluded, merged,
orrephrasedtobepresentedtopanellistsforrevaluation.
These modifications were based on or inspired by the
hundredsofcommentsaddedbypanellists.
Inround2,surveyparticipantsweregivenalinktothe
aggregated ratings from round 1 (https://osf.io/zyacb/;
supplementary table 3). In round 2, participants rated
59candidateitems,coveringthetitle(oneitem),abstract
(one item), introduction (four items), methods (32
items), results (11 items), discussion (eight items), and
other(twoitems).Theitemrelatingtopatientandpublic
involvement received 69% agreement for inclusion
(supplementary table 4). Despite falling just below the
70% threshold, the steering group agreed to retain this
itemfordiscussionduringtheconsensusmeeting.
Patient and public involvement and engagement
meeting
An online meeting was held on 8 April 2022 with
nine members of the Health Data Research UK’s group
for patient and public involvement and engagement
(PPIE) (https://www.hdruk.ac.uk/about-us/involving-
and-engaging-patients-and-the-public/), chaired by
Sophie Staniszewska (University of Warwick, UK). This
meeting was not planned in the study protocol and
was the only deviation from the published protocol.79
Beforethemeeting,thePPIEgroupwassentasummary
of the TRIPOD+AI project (available at https://osf.io/
zyacb/), including an executive summary drafted by
one member of PPIE group, and the draft checklist. At
the meeting, GSC presented details of the TRIPOD+AI
initiative, the project status, and draft guidance
resultingfromround2oftheDelphisurvey.Participants
then asked questions and discussed the project aims
and scope. Following feedback received at the PPI
meeting, and through correspondence written after
the meeting, the draft checklist was revised to improve
clarity. Three members of the PPI group were invited
and two subsequently attended the online consensus
meeting with the wider group of stakeholders on 5 July
2022. The manuscript was circulated to the three PPI
members for their input and approval.
Consensus meeting
An online consensus meeting was held on 5 July 2022,
chaired by GSC and KGMM. Participants were chosen
to try to ensure balanced representation of the key
stakeholder groups, disciplines, and geographical
diversity. Twenty eight participants attended part or all
of the meeting, including one non-voting attendee (PL).
Before the meeting, invited participants were
emailed a document (available at https://osf.io/zyacb/)
containingabriefoverviewofTRIPOD+AI,theconsensus
thebmj|BMJ2024;385:e078378 | doi: 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378 5
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
. by guest on 23 July 2026 https://www.bmj.com/ Downloaded from 16 April 2024. 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378 on BMJ: first published asRESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
meeting format and instructions, a summary of the
aggregated responses from round 2 of the Delphi survey
(supplementary table 3), and the draft TRIPOD+AI
checklist. The checklist circulated to the consensus
meeting participants included 59 items covering: title
(oneitem),abstract(oneitem),introduction(fouritems),
methods (32 items), results (11 items), discussion (eight
items),andother(twoitems).
Given the high endorsement achieved for many items
in round 2, a subset of 17 items were highlighted for
plenary discussion and voting during the consensus
meeting. After discussion, participants were given one
minute to vote to include or exclude the item from the
TRIPOD+AI checklist. The voting was registered using
the poll function of the online meeting program. The 17
itemsincludedoneitemthathadnotachievedconsensus
in round 2 and 16 items that had undergone rewording
after round 2 or were new items that were not included
inTRIPOD2015.Afterdiscussionandvotingonthese17
items,thefinalTRIPOD+AIchecklistwasformed.
TRIPOD+AI statement
TRIPOD+AI comprises a checklist of items that are
considered essential for good reporting of studies
developingorevaluating(validating)apredictionmodel
usinganystatisticalormachinelearningmethods(table
2).Box2summarisesnoteworthyadditionsandchanges
to TRIPOD 2015. The TRIPOD+AI checklist comprises
Table 2 | TRIPOD+AI checklist for the reporting of prediction model studies
Section/topic Item Development/evaluation* Checklist item
Title
Title 1 D;E Identify the study as developing or evaluating the performance of a multivariable prediction model, the target
population, and the outcome to be predicted
Abstract
Abstract 2 D;E See TRIPOD+AI for Abstracts checklist
Introduction
Background 3a D;E Explain the healthcare context (including whether diagnostic or prognostic) and rationale for developing or evaluating
the prediction model, including references to existing models
3b D;E Describe the target population and the intended purpose of the prediction model in the context of the care pathway,
including its intended users (eg, healthcare professionals, patients, public)
3c D;E Describe any known health inequalities between sociodemographic groups
Objectives 4 D;E Specify the study objectives, including whether the study describes the development or validation of a prediction model
(or both)
Methods
Data 5a D;E Describe the sources of data separately for the development and evaluation datasets (eg, randomised trial, cohort,
routine care or registry data), the rationale for using these data, and representativeness of the data
5b D;E Specify the dates of the collected participant data, including start and end of participant accrual; and, if applicable, end
of follow-up
Participants 6a D;E Specify key elements of the study setting (eg, primary care, secondary care, general population) including the number
and location of centres
6b D;E Describe the eligibility criteria for study participants
6c D;E Give details of any treatments received, and how they were handled during model development or evaluation, if relevant
Data
preparation
7 D;E Describe any data pre-processing and quality checking, including whether this was similar across relevant
sociodemographic groups
Outcome 8a D;E Clearly define the outcome that is being predicted and the time horizon, including how and when assessed, the rationale
for choosing this outcome, and whether the method of outcome assessment is consistent across sociodemographic groups
8b D;E If outcome assessment requires subjective interpretation, describe the qualifications and demographic characteristics of
the outcome assessors
8c D;E Report any actions to blind assessment of the outcome to be predicted
Predictors 9a D Describe the choice of initial predictors (eg, literature, previous models, all available predictors) and any pre-selection of
predictors before model building
9b D;E Clearly define all predictors, including how and when they were measured (and any actions to blind assessment of
predictors for the outcome and other predictors)
9c D;E If predictor measurement requires subjective interpretation, describe the qualifications and demographic characteristics
of the predictor assessors
Sample size 10 D;E Explain how the study size was arrived at (separately for development and evaluation), and justify that the study size
was sufficient to answer the research question. Include details of any sample size calculation
Missing data 11 D;E Describe how missing data were handled. Provide reasons for omitting any data
Analytical
methods
12a D Describe how the data were used (eg, for development and evaluation of model performance) in the analysis, including
whether the data were partitioned, considering any sample size requirements
12b D Depending on the type of model, describe how predictors were handled in the analyses (functional form, rescaling,
transformation, or any standardisation)
12c D Specify the type of model, rationale†, all model building steps, including any hyperparameter tuning, and method for
internal validation
12d D;E Describe if and how any heterogeneity in estimates of model parameter values and model performance was handled and
quantified across clusters (eg, hospitals, countries). See TRIPOD-Cluster for additional considerations‡
12e D;E Specify all measures and plots used (and their rationale) to evaluate model performance (eg, discrimination, calibration,
clinical utility) and, if relevant, to compare multiple models
12f E Describe any model updating (eg, recalibration) arising from the model evaluation, either overall or for particular
sociodemographic groups or settings
12g E For model evaluation, describe how the model predictions were calculated (eg, formula, code, object, application
programming interface)
(Continued)
6 doi: 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378|BMJ2024;385:e078378 | thebmj
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
. by guest on 23 July 2026 https://www.bmj.com/ Downloaded from 16 April 2024. 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378 on BMJ: first published asRESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
27 main items about the title (item 1), abstract (item
2), introduction (items 3 and 4), methods (items 5-17),
open science practises (item 18), patient and public
involvement (item 19), results (items 20-24), and
discussion(items25-27).Someitemsincludedmultiple
subitems, totalling to 52 checklist subitems.
TRIPOD+AI covers studies that describe the
development of a prediction model, the evaluation
(validation) of prediction model performance, or both.
Any items denoted D;E apply to all studies regardless
of whether they are developing a prediction model or
evaluatingtheperformanceofapredictionmodel(table
2). Items in the checklist denoted D apply to studies
that describe the development of a prediction model,
while items denoted E apply to studies that evaluate
the performance of a prediction model. For studies
both developing and evaluating the performance of a
prediction model, all checklist items apply.
A separate checklist for journal or conference
abstracts of prediction model studies is included in
Table 2 | Continued
Section/topic Item Development/evaluation* Checklist item
Class imbalance 13 D;E If class imbalance methods were used, state why and how this was done, and any subsequent methods to recalibrate
the model or the model predictions
Fairness 14 D;E Describe any approaches that were used to address model fairness and their rationale
Model output 15 D Specify the output of the prediction model (eg, probabilities, classification). Provide details and rationale for any
classification and how the thresholds were identified
Training versus
evaluation
16 D;E Identify any differences between the development and evaluation data in healthcare setting, eligibility criteria, outcome,
and predictors
Ethical approval 17 D;E Name the institutional research board or ethics committee that approved the study and describe the participant
informed consent or the ethics committee waiver of informed consent
Open science
Funding 18a D;E Give the source of funding and the role of the funders for the present study
Conflicts of
interest
18b D;E Declare any conflicts of interest and financial disclosures for all authors
Protocol 18c D;E Indicate where the study protocol can be accessed or state that a protocol was not prepared
Registration 18d D;E Provide registration information for the study, including register name and registration number, or state that the study
was not registered
Data sharing 18e D;E Provide details of the availability of the study data
Code sharing 18f D;E Provide details of the availability of the analytical code§
Patient and public involvement
Patient
and public
involvement
19 D;E Provide details of any patient and public involvement during the design, conduct, reporting, interpretation, or
dissemination of the study or state no involvement
Result
Participants 20a D;E Describe the flow of participants through the study, including the number of participants with and without the outcome
and, if applicable, a summary of the follow-up time. A diagram may be helpful
20b D;E Report the characteristics overall and, where applicable, for each data source or setting, including the key dates, key
predictors (including demographics), treatments received, sample size, number of outcome events, follow-up time, and
amount of missing data. A table may be helpful. Report any differences across key demographic groups
20c E For model evaluation, show a comparison with the development data of the distribution of important predictors
(demographics, predictors, and outcome)
Model
development
21 D;E Specify the number of participants and outcome events in each analysis (eg, for model development, hyperparameter
tuning, model evaluation)
Model
specification
22 D Provide details of the full prediction model (eg, formula, code, object, application programming interface) to allow
predictions in new individuals and to enable third party evaluation and implementation, including any restrictions to
access or reuse (eg, freely available, proprietary)¶
Model
performance
23a D;E Report model performance estimates with confidence intervals, including for any key subgroups (eg, sociodemographic).
Consider plots to aid presentation
23b D;E If examined, report results of any heterogeneity in model performance across clusters. See TRIPOD-Cluster for additional
details‡
Model updating 24 E Report the results from any model updating, including the updated model and subsequent performance
Discussion
Interpretation 25 D;E Give an overall interpretation of the main results, including issues of fairness in the context of the objectives and
previous studies
Limitations 26 D;E Discuss any limitations of the study (such as a non-representative sample, sample size, overfitting, missing data) and
their effects on any biases, statistical uncertainty, and generalisability
Usability of
the model in
the context of
current care
27a D Describe how poor quality or unavailable input data (eg, predictor values) should be assessed and handled when
implementing the prediction model
27b D Specify whether users will be required to interact in the handling of the input data or use of the model, and what level of
expertise is required of users
27c D;E Discuss any next steps for future research, with a specific view to applicability and generalisability of the model
TRIPOD=Transparent Reporting of a multivariable prediction model for Individual Prognosis Or Diagnosis; AI=artificial intelligence.
*D=items relevant only to the development of a prediction model; E=items relating solely to the evaluation of a prediction model; D;E=items applicable to both the development and evaluation
of a prediction model.
†Separately for all model building approaches.
‡TRIPOD-Cluster is a checklist of reporting recommendations for studies developing or validating models that explicitly account for clustering or explore heterogeneity in model performance (eg,
at different hospitals or centres).19 20
§Relates to the analysis code, for example, any data cleaning, feature engineering, model building, and evaluation.
¶Relates to the code to implement the model to get estimates of risk for a new individual.
thebmj|BMJ2024;385:e078378 | doi: 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378 7
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
. by guest on 23 July 2026 https://www.bmj.com/ Downloaded from 16 April 2024. 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378 on BMJ: first published asRESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
TRIPOD+AI. This checklist updates the TRIPOD for
Abstracts statement,18
reflecting new content and
maintaining consistency with TRIPOD+AI (table 3).
The recommendations in TRIPOD+AI are for
transparently reporting how prediction model
research was conducted; it does not prescribe how to
develop or evaluate a prediction model. The checklist
is not a quality appraisal tool. Readers are referred to
PROBAST90 91
and the forthcoming PROBAST+AI79
to
assess the quality and risk of bias of prediction models
(https://www.probast.org/).
How to use TRIPOD+AI
The TRIPOD+AI checklist supersedes the TRIPOD
2015 checklist, which should no longer be used.
For prediction model studies that have accounted
for clustering (eg, multiple hospitals, multiple
datasets), authors should consult TRIPOD-Cluster
for additional reporting recommendations.19 20
The
2015 explanation and elaboration document remains
an important document to provide background and
examples for most of the TRIPOD+AI reporting items17
(because many items have not changed or have been
minimally changed), while we produce a detailed and
updated document for TRIPOD+AI. We recommend
usingTRIPOD+AIearlyinthewritingprocesstoensure
that all key details are addressed and reported. An
expanded checklist in a bullet point structure has
been developed (supplementary table 1) to facilitate
implementation of TRIPOD+AI by providing a brief
rationale and guidance for each item in the checklist.
Although many of the items in the TRIPOD+AI
checklist have a natural order and sequence in a
report, some do not. We do not stipulate a structured
format or dictate where each individual reporting
recommendation should appear in a prediction model
report or publication, because this order might also
depend on journal formatting policies.
The recommendations contained within TRIPOD+AI
are the minimum reporting recommendations, and
authors may provide additional information. If journal
word limits and restrictions on number of tables and
figures in the main body of the manuscript complicate
reporting,authorscanreportandreferencesomeofthe
requested or additional information in supplementary
material. If the information required is already
reported in a publicly accessible study protocol, then
referring to that document may suﬃce. If a particular
checklist item cannot be discussed in the report
because the information is unknown or irrelevant,
then this should be acknowledged and clearly stated.
Additional files and study materials not included in
the supplementary material should be deposited in
Table 3 | Essential items to include for the reporting of prediction model studies in a journal or conference abstract (TRIPOD+AI for Abstracts*)
Section and item Checklist item
Title
1 Identify the study as developing or evaluating the performance of a multivariable prediction model, the target population, and the outcome to be predicted
Background
2 Provide a brief explanation of the healthcare context and rationale for developing or evaluating the performance of all models
Objectives
3 Specify the study objectives, including whether the study describes model development, evaluation, or both
Methods
4 Describe the sources of data
5 Describe the eligibility criteria and setting where the data were collected
6 Specify the outcome to be predicted by the model, including time horizon of predictions in case of prognostic models
7 Specify the type of model, a summary of the model-building steps, and the method for internal validation†
8 Specify the measures used to assess model performance (eg, discrimination, calibration, clinical utility)
Results
9 Report the number of participants and outcome events
10 Summarise the predictors in the final model†
11 Report model performance estimates (with confidence intervals)
Discussion
12 Give an overall interpretation of the main results
Registration
13 Give the registration number and name of the registry or repository
TRIPOD=Transparent Reporting of a multivariable prediction model for Individual Prognosis Or Diagnosis; AI=artificial intelligence.
*This checklist is based on the TRIPOD for Abstracts statement published in 2020,17
but has been revised and updated for consistency with the TRIPOD+AI statement.
†Relevant only to studies describing the development of a prediction model.
Box 2: Noteworthy changes and additions to TRIPOD 2015
•Newchecklistofreportingrecommendationstocoverpredictionmodelstudiesusing
anyregressionormachinelearningmethod(eg,randomforests,deeplearning),and
harmonisenomenclaturebetweenregressionandmachinelearningcommunities
•NewTRIPOD+AIchecklistsupersedestheTRIPOD2015checklist,whichshouldno
longerbeused
•Particularemphasisonfairness(box1)toraiseawarenessandensurethatreports
mentionwhetherspecificmethodswereusedtodealwithfairness.Aspectsof
fairnessareembeddedthroughoutthechecklist
•InclusionofTRIPOD+AIforAbstractsforguidanceonreportingabstracts
•Modificationofthemodelperformanceitemrecommendingthatauthorsevaluate
modelperformanceinkeysubgroups(eg,sociodemographic)
•Inclusionofanewitemonpatientandpublicinvolvementtoraiseawarenessand
promptauthorstoprovidedetailsonanypatientandpublicinvolvementduringthe
design,conduct,reporting(andinterpretation),anddisseminationofthestudy
•Inclusionofanopensciencesectionwithsubitemsonstudyprotocols,registration,
datasharingandcodesharing
TRIPOD=TransparentReportingofamultivariablepredictionmodelforIndividualPrognosisor
Diagnosis;AI=artificialintelligence.
8 doi: 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378|BMJ2024;385:e078378 | thebmj
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
. by guest on 23 July 2026 https://www.bmj.com/ Downloaded from 16 April 2024. 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378 on BMJ: first published asRESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
general purpose (eg, Open Science Framework, Dryad,
figshare) or institutional open access repositories that
provide free access in perpetuity. Details of access to
any additional files should be referenced and linked,
for example, with a doi number in the main study
report or publication.
We recommend that authors submit a completed
checklist indicating the page or line where each
requested item can be found, to help the editorial and
peer review process. A template for the TRIPOD+AI
checklist for filling out separately can be found in
supplementary table 2 and is available to download
from www.tripod-statement.org.
News, announcements, and information relating
to TRIPOD+AI can be found on the TRIPOD website
(www.tripod-statement.org) and on social media
accounts such as X (formerly known as Twitter; @
TRIPODStatement). The Enhancing the Quality
and Transparency Of health Research (EQUATOR)
Network (https://www.equator-network.org/) will also
disseminate and promote the TRIPOD+AI statement.
Translation of TRIPOD+AI into diﬀerent languages
is welcomed and encouraged, please contact the
corresponding author. Translations should use the
structured and predefined process that includes
authors of the original publication and receives their
approval. The TRIPOD website contains further details
on translation (www.tripod-statement.org).
Discussion
TRIPOD+AI has been developed through an
international multi-stakeholder consensus process.
It provides minimum reporting recommendations
for studies describing the development or evaluation
(validation) of prediction models using any regression
or machine learning methods. At the time of guideline
development, foundation and large language models
(such as ChatGPT) that are rapidly gaining momentum
were not considered—the TRIPOD+AI guidance is
primarily aimed at non-generative models. However,
many of the principles are applicable for driving
transparency in generative AI studies in health.
Periodic updating of TRIPOD+AI will be needed to
remain relevant and reflect advancements in AI and
machine learning methods, for example, by explicitly
looking at generative approaches.
TRIPOD+AI was developed by updating TRIPOD
2015, with recommendations informed by systematic
reviews of the literature, a Delphi survey, and an
online consensus meeting. Reporting TRIPOD+AI
items can help users to understand and appraise the
quality of the study methods, increasing transparency
around the study findings, reducing overinterpretation
of study findings, facilitating replication and
reproducibility, and aiding implementation of the
prediction model. The checklist items are minimum
reporting recommendations, and authors will typically
provide additional details on the data, study design,
methods, analysis, results, and discussion.
TRIPOD+AI emphasises fairness issues throughout
the checklist, which was lacking or not explicitly
stated in TRIPOD 2015.33
Fairness in prediction model
research is particularly important in healthcare, which
has gained prominence with AI and machine learning
methods being used to develop models to assist in
decision making. Fairness in this context means that
prediction models are designed and used in a way that
does not adversely discriminate against any particular
group of individuals and does not create or exacerbate
(and ideally mitigates or reduces) existing inequalities
in healthcare provision or patient outcomes.92
One
important aspect of fairness is ensuring that the data
used to develop or evaluate prediction models are
representative and diverse, and that limitations of
data bias are acknowledged, dealt with, and mitigated
during model development. The STANDING Together
initiative is in the process of developing standards
for data diversity, inclusivity, and generalisability to
tackle bias in AI health datasets.62
Data should ideally include information from
individuals of diﬀerent ages, sexes/genders, and
races/ethnicities, with diﬀerent health conditions
or comorbidities and from diﬀerent geographical
locations. These diﬀerences should be representative
of the population in whom the prediction model is
intended to be used. If the data used to develop the
modelsdonotadequatelyrepresentthefulldiversityof
theintendedusepopulation,theresultingmodelmight
not perform as expected in those missing from the
data, which should be clearly stated. If the data used
to evaluate a model are not representative of the target
population, then the estimated predictive accuracy in
subgroups (eg, defined by relevant personal, social, or
clinical attributes) could be biased and misleading.
While adequate representation of minoritised and
underservedgroupswithindatasetsisonekeyelement
to achieving fairness goals, representation alone does
not guarantee fairness.61 93
Therefore, TRIPOD+AI has
embedded items on fairness throughout, including
in the background (item 3c), methods (items 5a, 7,
8a, 8b, 9c, 12f, 14), results (items 20b, 23a), and
discussion (items 25, 26).
Fairness in healthcare also means involving diverse
stakeholders, including patients, the general public,
and clinicians, in the development, evaluation,
implementation, and deployment of a prediction
model into the clinical pathway.94
Involving a variety
of perspectives will help to ensure that the prediction
model is, in principle, designed to meet the needs
of all individuals and is used in a way that is fair
and equitable, promoting health equity. TRIPOD+AI
includes item 19 on public and patient involvement
to incentivise the integration of patient involvement
in prediction model studies beyond a mere tick box
exercise, to encourage and promote the principles of
open science and engagement, and to ensure better
clinical and public acceptability of the work.
TRIPOD+AI prominently features open science
practices.35
Open science practices are crucial
for prediction model research in healthcare as
they promote transparency, reproducibility, and
collaboration between researchers.95
By registering
thebmj|BMJ2024;385:e078378 | doi: 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378 9
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
. by guest on 23 July 2026 https://www.bmj.com/ Downloaded from 16 April 2024. 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378 on BMJ: first published asRESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
researchandmakingstudymaterialssuchasprotocols,
data, code, and the prediction model open available,
other researchers can verify the findings and evaluate
model performance in new data to ensure that models
are accurate, and evaluate models for safety. Open
science practices also enable researchers to build on
each other’s work, leading to more eﬃcient progress
in healthcare. These practices can have a considerable
impactonpatientoutcomesbyimprovingtheaccuracy,
integrity, and reliability of prediction models. If data
are openly shared, clinicians and researchers can
develop or evaluate models on larger and more diverse
sets of patient data,96
potentially leading to more
accurate predictions and better informed decisions
for patient healthcare. Therefore, TRIPOD+AI includes
a section on open science, covering issues such as
funding declarations (item 18a), conflicts of interest
(18b), protocol availability (18c), study registration
(18d), data sharing (18e), and code sharing (18f).
We anticipate that the key users and beneficiaries
of TRIPOD+AI will be researchers writing papers,
journal editors and peer reviewers who evaluate
research papers, and other stakeholders (eg,
academic institutions, policy makers, funders,
regulators, patients, study participants, and the
broader public) who will benefit from the increased
quality of prediction model research (table 4). The
guideline is relevant for any reports related to clinical
prediction model development and validation studies,
including medical research articles and other areas
where evidenced reports are needed, for example, to
accompany software and tools.
Table 4 | Adherence to the TRIPOD+AI reporting guideline: potential benefits from stakeholders’ actions
User/stakeholder Proposed action Potential benefits
Academic institutions Promote or require adherence of TRIPOD+AI by investigators
developing, evaluating, or implementing prediction models
Enhance a culture of transparency in the design, analysis, and reporting of
prediction model research
Provide training for early career researchers on the importance
and benefits of transparent and complete reporting, including
requiring doctoral students to write their thesis and manuscripts
in accordance with the full TRIPOD+AI guideline
Improve the quality, accountability, reproducibility, replicability, and
usefulness of produced research
Researchers Adhere to TRIPOD+AI when writing studies for publication Improved completeness and quality of reporting
Increased awareness of the minimal detail required and expected when writing
a prediction model publication
Improved quality, accountability, reproducibility, replicability, and usefulness
of produced research
Improved reporting of details that facilitate independent evaluation of the model
Journal editors Require and enforce authors to use TRIPOD+AI and submit a
completed a checklist when writing the manuscript
Improved understanding of journal requirements and expectations for
prediction model publications
Recommend peer reviewers use TRIPOD+AI Increased efficiency of peer review resulting from improved author
understanding of journal requirements for prediction model publications
Improved quality, accountability, reproducibility, replicability, and usefulness
of published research
Peer reviewers Use TRIPOD+AI to evaluate completeness of reporting Improve the efficiency and quality of peer review
Facilitate and direct specific feedback to authors on where important details
are missing
Funders Recommend or mandate use of TRIPOD+AI by investigators when
receiving a grant for prediction model research
Increase the usefulness of research outputs
Reduce avoidable research waste due to incomplete reporting
Ensure that funded research can be used by others
Patients, public, and study
participants
Advocate use of TRIPOD+AI by authors, peer reviewers, journals,
and funders
Improved trust in research findings
Improved understanding of prediction model research
Promote health equity considerations in research
Align patient reported outcomes and patient experience with clinical research
outcomes for precision medicine and personalised disease management
Systematic reviewers and
meta-researchers
Use TRIPOD+AI to assess completeness of reporting Improved evaluation of study quality when used alongside risk of bias tools
(eg, PROBAST)
Use TRIPOD+AI as an aid when assessing quality and risks of bias Improved availability of data needed for meta-analysis
Policy makers Use or promote TRIPOD+AI to ensure research is transparently
and completely reported
Ensure decisions to evaluate or implement a prediction model are based on
complete and transparently reported information
Add integrity for evidence based policy recommendations
Regulators Clinical reviewers use TRIPOD+AI to assess completeness of
clinical investigation reporting for “software as a medical device”
regulatory submissions where the operating principle of the
product is a prediction model
Align reported intended use with regulatory intended purpose
Align medical device regulatory review and pivotal investigational reporting
with best practice
Encourage manufacturers to publish clinical investigation reports by
encouraging one common standard
Technology and medical
device manufacturers
Verify whether sufficient details about a model are available
to enable development and manufacturing of technology and
devices
Encourages manufacturers to publish clinical investigation reports by
encouraging one common standard
Healthcare professionals Verify whether sufficient details about a model are available
before purchasing or using a model to support clinical use
Improved understanding of the target population of a model and the clinical
decision it is intended to support
Improved understanding of model predictions and awareness of limitations
Improved trust in research findings
TRIPOD=Transparent Reporting of a multivariable prediction model for Individual Prognosis Or Diagnosis; AI=artificial intelligence.
10 doi: 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378|BMJ2024;385:e078378 | thebmj
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
. by guest on 23 July 2026 https://www.bmj.com/ Downloaded from 16 April 2024. 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378 on BMJ: first published asRESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
We encourage editors and publishers to support
adherence to TRIPOD+AI by referring to it in journals’
instructions to authors, enforcing its use during the
submission and peer review process, and making
adherence to the recommendations an expectation.
We also encourage funders to require that funding
applications for prediction model studies include a
plan to report their prediction model according to the
TRIPOD+AI recommendations, thereby minimising
research waste and ensuring value for money.
TRIPOD+AI working group/consensus meeting
participants: Gary Collins (University of Oxford, UK),
Karel Moons (UMC Utrecht, Netherlands), Johannes
Reitsma (UMC Utrecht, Netherlands), Andrew
Beam (Harvard School of Public Health, USA), Ben
Van Calster (KU Leuven, Belgium), Paula Dhiman
(University of Oxford, UK), Richard Riley (University of
Birmingham, UK), Marzyeh Ghassemi (Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, USA), Patricia Logullo
(University of Oxford, UK), Maarten van Smeden (UMC
Utrecht, Netherlands), Jennifer Catherine Camaradou
(Health Data Research (HDR) UK public and patient
involvement group, NHS England Accelerated Access
Collaborative evaluation advisory group member,
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
covid-19expertpanel),RichardParnell(HDRUKpublic
and patient involvement group), Elizabeth Loder (The
BMJ), Robert Golub (Northwestern University Feinberg
School of Medicine, USA (JAMA, at the time of the
consensus meeting)), Naomi Lee (National Institute for
Health and Clinical Excellence, UK; The Lancet, at the
time of consensus meeting), Johan Ordish (Roche, UK;
Medicine and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency,
UK at the time of consensus meeting), Laure Wynants
(KU Leuven, Belgium), Leo Celi (Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, USA), Bilal Mateen (Wellcome
Trust, UK), Alastair Denniston (University of
Birmingham, UK), Karandeep Singh (University of
Michigan, USA), Georg Heinze (Medical University of
Vienna, Austria), Lauren Oaken-Rayner (University
of Adelaide, Australia), Melissa McCradden (Hospital
for Sick Children, Canada), Hugh Harvey (Hardian
Health, UK), Andre Pascal Kengne (University of Cape
Town, South Africa), Viknesh Sounderajah (Imperial
CollegeLondon,UK),LenaMaier-Hein(GermanCancer
Research Centre, Germany), Anne-Laure Boulesteix
(University of Munich, Germany), Xiaoxuan Liu
(University of Birmingham, UK), Emily Lam (HDR UK
public and patient involvement group), Ben Glocker
(Imperial College London, UK), Sherri Rose (Stanford
University, US), Michael Hoﬀman (University of
Toronto, Canada), and Spiros Denaxas (University
College London, UK). The last seven participants in
this list did not attend the virtual consensus meeting.
AUTHOR AFFILIATIONS
1
Centre for Statistics in Medicine, UK EQUATOR Centre, Nuffield
Department of Orthopaedics, Rheumatology, and Musculoskeletal
Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7LD, UK
2
Julius Centre for Health Sciences and Primary Care, University
Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands
3
Institute of Applied Health Research, College of Medical and Dental
Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK
4
National Institute for Health and Care Research (NIHR) Birmingham
Biomedical Research Centre, Birmingham, UK
5
Department of Epidemiology, HarvardT H Chan School of Public
Health, Boston, MA, USA
6
Department of Development and Regeneration, KU Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium
7
Department of Biomedical Data Science, Leiden University Medical
Centre, Leiden, Netherlands
8
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
Institute for Medical Engineering andScience, Massachusetts
Institute ofTechnology, Cambridge, MA, USA
9
Institute of Inflammation and Ageing, College of Medical and
DentalSciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK
10
University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust,
Birmingham, UK
11
Institute for Medical Information Processing, Biometry and
Epidemiology, Faculty of Medicine, Ludwig-Maximilians-University
of Munich and Munich Centre of Machine Learning, Germany
12
Patient representative, Health Data Research UK patient and
public involvement and engagement group
13
Patient representative, University of East Anglia, Faculty of Health
Sciences, Norwich Research Park, Norwich, UK
14
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA
15
Laboratory for Computational Physiology, Massachusetts Institute
ofTechnology, Cambridge, MA, USA
16
Department of Biostatistics, HarvardT H Chan School of Public
Health, Boston, MA, USA
17
InstituteofHealthInformatics,UniversityCollegeLondon,London,UK
18
British Heart Foundation Data Science Centre, London, UK
19
Department of Computing, Imperial College London, London, UK
20
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago,
IL, USA
21
Hardian Health, Haywards Heath, UK
22
Section for Clinical Biometrics, Centre for Medical Data Science,
Medical University ofVienna, Vienna, Austria
23
Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network,
Toronto, ON, Canada
24
Department of Medical Biophysics, University ofToronto, Toronto,
ON, Canada
25
Department of Computer Science, University ofToronto, Toronto,
ON, Canada
26
Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Toronto, ON, Canada
27
Department of Medicine, University of Cape Town, Cape Town,
South Africa
28
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, London, UK
29
The BMJ, London, UK
30
Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital,
Harvard MedicalSchool, Boston, MA, USA
31
Department of Intelligent MedicalSystems, German Cancer
Research Centre, Heidelberg, Germany
32
Wellcome Trust, London, UK
33
Alan Turing Institute, London, UK
34
Department of Bioethics, Hospital for SickChildren Toronto, ON,
Canada
35
Genetics and Genome Biology, SickKids Research Institute,
Toronto, ON, Canada
36
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, University of Adelaide,
Adelaide, SA, Australia
37
MedicinesandHealthcare productsRegulatoryAgency, London, UK
38
Department of Health Policy and Center for Health Policy, Stanford
University, Stanford, CA, USA
39
Department of Learning Health Sciences, University of Michigan
MedicalSchool, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
40
Department of Epidemiology, CAPHRI Care and Public Health
Research Institute, Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands
We thanktheTRIPOD+AI Delphi panelmembersfor their time and
valuable contribution in helping to developTRIPOD+AI statement.
FulllistofDelphi participantsare asfollows(in alphabeticalorder of
firstname): AbhishekGupta, Adrian Barnett, Adrian Jonas, Agathe
Truchot, Aiden Doherty, Alan Fraser, AlexFowler, AlexGaraiman,
thebmj|BMJ2024;385:e078378 | doi: 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378 11
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
. by guest on 23 July 2026 https://www.bmj.com/ Downloaded from 16 April 2024. 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378 on BMJ: first published asRESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
Alistair Denniston, Amin Adibi, André Carrington, Andre Esteva, Andrew
Althouse, Andrew Beam, AndrewSoltan, Ane Appelt, Anne-Laure
Boulesteix, Ari Ercole, Armando Bedoya, BaptisteVasey, Bapu Desiraju,
BarbaraSeeliger, BartGeerts, Beatrice Panico, Ben Glocker, BenVan
Calster, Benjamin Fine, Benjamin Goldstein, Benjamin Gravesteijn,
BenjaminWissel, BilalMateen, Bjoern Holzhauer, BorisJanssen,
Boyi Guo, Brooke Levis, CateyBunce, CharlesKahn, ChrisTomlinson,
Christopher Kelly, Christopher Lovejoy, Clare McGenity, ConradHarrison,
Constanza Andaur Navarro, Daan Nieboer, Dan Adler, DanialBahudin,
DanielStahl, DanielYoo, Danilo Bzdok, Darren Dahly, DarrenTreanor,
DavidHiggins, DavidMcClernon, DavidPasquier, DavidTaylor, Declan
O’Regan, EmilyBebbington, ErikRanschaert, EvangelosKanoulas,
Facundo Diaz, Felipe Kitamura, Flavio Clesio, Floorvan Leeuwen,
FrankHarrell, FrankRademakers, GaelVaroquaux, GarrettBullock,
GaryCollins, GaryWeissman, Georg Heinze, George Fowler, George
Kostopoulos, GeorgiosLyratzaopoulos, Gianluca DiTanna, Gianluca
Pellino, Girish Kulkarni, Giuseppe BiondiZoccai, Glen Martin, Gregg
Gascon, Harlan Krumholz, HerdiantriSufriyana, Hongqiu Gu, Hrvoje
Bogunovic, Hui Jin, IanScott, Ijeoma Uchegbu, Indra Joshi, Irene
Stratton, JamesGlasbey, Jamie Miles, JamieSergeant, Jan Roth, Jared
Wohlgemut, Javier CarmonaSanz, Jean-EmmanuelBibault, Jeremy
Cohen, Ji Eun Park, Jie Ma, JoelAmoussou, Johan Ordish, Johannes
Reitsma, John Pickering, Joie Ensor, Jose LFlores-Guerrero, Joseph
LeMoine, Joshua Bridge, Josip Car, JunfengWang, KarelMoons, Keegan
Korthauer, KellyReeve, Laura Ación, Laura Bonnett, LaureWynants,
Lena Maier-Hein, Leo AnthonyCeli, LiefPagalan, Ljubomir Buturovic,
LottyHooft, Luke Farrow, MaartenVanSmeden, Marianne Aznar,
Mario Doria, MarkGilthorpe, MarkSendak, Martin Fabregate, Marzyeh
Ghassemi, MatthewSperrin, MatthewStrother, Mattia Prosperi, Melissa
McCradden, MenelaosKonstantinidis, MerelHuisman, MichaelHarhay,
MichaelHoffman, MiguelAngelLuque, MohammadMansournia, Munya
Dimairo, Musa Abdulkareem, Myura Nagendran, NielsPeek, Nigam
Shah, NikolasPontikos, Nurulamin Noor, Oilivier Groot, PallJonsson,
Patricia Logullo, PatrickBossuyt, PatrickLyons, PatrickOmoumi, Paul
Tiffin, Paula Dhiman, Peter Austin, Quentin Noirhomme, RachelKuo,
Ram Bajpal, Ravi Aggarwal, RichardRiley, Richiardi Jonas, Robert
Golub, RobertPlatt, RohitSingla, Roi Anteby, RupaSakar,Safoora
Masoumi,Sara Khalid,Saskia Haitjema,Seong Park,ShravyaShetty,
SpirosDenaxas,StaceyFisher,Stephanie Hicks,SusanShelmerdine,
TammyClifford,TatyanaShamliyan,TeusKappen,Tim Leiner,Tim
Liu,Tim Ramsay,Toni Martinez, UriShalit,Valentijn de Jong,Valentyn
Bezshapkin,Veronika Cheplygina,Victor Castro,VikneshSounderajah,
VineetKamal,VinyasHarish,WimWeber,Wouter Amsterdam,Xioaxuan
Liu,ZacharyCohen,ZakiaSalod, andZane Perkins.
We thankSophie Staniszewska (University of Warwick, UK) for chairing
the HDR UK patient and public involvement and engagement meeting,
where the TRIPOD+AI study and draft (pre-consensus meeting)
checklist was presented and discussed; and Jennifer de Beyer for
proofreading the manuscript (University of Oxford, UK).
Contributors: GSC and KGMM conceived the study and this paper
and are joint first authors. GSC, PL, PD, RDR, ALB, BVC, XL, JBR, MvS,
and KGMM designed the surveys carried out to inform the guideline
content. PL analysed the survey results and free text comments from
the surveys. GSC designed the materials for the consensus meeting
with input from KGMM. All authors exceptSR, MMH, XL, SD, BG, and
ALB attended the consensus meeting. PL tookconsolidated notes
from the consensus meeting. GSC drafted the manuscript with input
and edits from KGMM. All authors were involved in revising the
article critically for important intellectual content and approved the
final version of the article. GSC is the guarantor of this work. The
corresponding author attests that all listed authors meet authorship
criteria and that no others meeting the criteria have been omitted.
Funding: This research was supported by Cancer Research UK
programme grant (C49297/A27294), which supports GSC and PL;
Health Data Research UK, an initiative funded by UK Research and
Innovation, Department of Health andSocial Care (England) and the
devolved administrations, and leading medical research charities,
which supports GSC; an Engineering and PhysicalSciences Research
Council grant for “Artificial intelligence innovation to accelerate health
research” (EP/Y018516/1), which supports GSC, PD, and RDR;
Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (which supports
KGMM); and University Hospitals Leuven (COPREDICT grant), Internal
Funds KU Leuven (grant C24M/20/064), and Research Foundation–
Flanders (grant G097322N), which supports BVC and LW. The funders
had no role in considering the study design or in the collection,
analysis, interpretation of data, writing of the report, or decision to
submit the article for publication.
Competing interests: Allauthorshave completedthe ICMJEuniform
disclosure form athttps://www.icmje.org/disclosure-of-interest/
anddeclare: supportfrom the funding bodieslistedabove for the
submittedwork; no financialrelationshipswith anyorganisationsthat
mighthave an interestin the submittedworkin the previousthree
years; no other relationshipsor activitiesthatcouldappear to have
influencedthe submittedwork. GSCisa NationalInstitute for Health
andCare Research (NIHR) senior investigator, the director ofthe UK
EQUATOR Centre, editor-in-chiefofBMC Diagnosticand Prognostic
Research, anda statisticseditor for The BMJ. KGMM isdirector ofHealth
Innovation Netherlandsandeditor-in-chiefofBMC Diagnosticand
PrognosticResearch. RDR isan NIHR senior investigator, a statistics
editor for The BMJ, andreceivesroyaltiesfrom textbooksPrognosis
Research in Healthcare andIndividual ParticipantData Meta-Analysis.
AKD isan NIHR senior investigator. EWListhe headofresearch atThe
BMJ. BG isa parttime employee ofHeartFlow andKheiron Medical
Technologiesandholdsstockoptionswith both aspartofthe standard
compensation package.SR receivesroyaltiesfromSpringer for the
textbooksTargeted Learning: Causal Inference forObservational and
Experimental Data andTargeted Learning: Causal Inference forComplex
Longitudinal Studies. JCCreceiveshonorariumsasa currentlaymember
on the UKNICEcovid-19 expertpanelanda citizen partner on the
COVID-END Covid-19 Evidence Networkto supportdecision making;
wasa laymember on the UKNIHR AI AWARD panelin 2020-22 andis
a currentlaymember on the UKNHSEnglandAACAcceleratedAccess
Collaborative NHSAI LaboratoryEvaluation AdvisoryGroup; isa patient
fellow ofthe European Patients’ AcademyonTherapeuticInnovation
anda EURORDISrare disease alumni; reportsgrantsfrom the UK
NationalInstitute for Health andCare Research, European Commission,
UKCellGene Catapult, UniversityCollege London, andUniversityofEast
Anglia; reportspatientspeaker feesfrom MEDABLE, ReutersPharma
events, PatientsasPartnersEurope, andEIT HealthScandinavia;
reportsconsultancyfeesfrom Roche Global,Smith, the FutureScience
Group andSpringer Healthcare (scientificpublishing), outside ofthe
scope ofthe presentwork; andisa strategicboardmember ofthe
UKMedicalResearch CouncilIASB AdvancedPain DiscoveryPlatform
initiative, Plymouth Institute ofHealth, andEU projectDigipredictEdge
AI-deployedDigitalTwinsfor covid-19 Cardiovascular Disease. ALB
isa paidconsultantfor Generate Biomedicines, Flagship Pioneering,
Porter Health, FL97,Tessera, FL85; hasan equitystake in Generate
Biomedicines; andreceivesresearch funding supportfromSmith,
NationalHeart, Lung, andBloodInstitute, andNationalInstitute of
DiabetesandDigestive andKidneyDiseases. No other conflictsof
interestswith thisspecificworkare declared.
Data sharing: AggregatedDelphi surveyresponsesare available on the
OpenScience FrameworkTRIPOD+AI repositoryhttps://osf.io/zyacb/.
Provenance and peer review: Not commissioned; externally peer
reviewed.
This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY 4.0) license, which
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt and build upon this work,
for commercial use, provided the original workis properly cited.
See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
1 van Smeden M, Reitsma JB, Riley RD, Collins GS, Moons KG.
Clinical prediction models: diagnosis versus prognosis. J Clin
Epidemiol 2021;132:142-5. doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2021.01.009
2 NashefSA, Roques F, Sharples LD, et al. EuroSCORE II. Eur J
Cardiothorac Surg 2012;41:734-45. doi:10.1093/ejcts/ezs043
3 Gail MH, Brinton LA, Byar DP, et al. Projecting individualized
probabilities of developing breast cancer for white females who
are being examined annually. J Natl Cancer Inst 1989;81:1879-86.
doi:10.1093/jnci/81.24.1879
4 D’Agostino RBSr, Vasan RS, Pencina MJ, et al. General
cardiovascular riskprofile for use in primary care: the Framingham
HeartStudy. Circulation 2008;117:743-53. doi:10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.107.699579
5 Steyerberg EW, Mushkudiani N, Perel P, et al. Predicting outcome
after traumatic brain injury: development and international validation
of prognostic scores based on admission characteristics. PLoS
Med 2008;5:e165. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.0050165
6 Kanis JA, Oden A, Johnell O, et al. The use of clinical riskfactors
enhances the performance of BMD in the prediction of hip
and osteoporotic fractures in men and women. Osteoporos
Int 2007;18:1033-46. doi:10.1007/s00198-007-0343-y
7 Damen JAAG, Hooft L, Schuit E, et al. Prediction models for
cardiovascular disease riskin the general population: systematic
review. BMJ 2016;353:i2416. doi:10.1136/bmj.i2416
8 Bellou V, Belbasis L, Konstantinidis AK, Tzoulaki I, Evangelou E.
Prognostic models for outcome prediction in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease: systematic review and critical
appraisal. BMJ 2019;367:l5358. doi:10.1136/bmj.l5358
12 doi: 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378|BMJ2024;385:e078378 | thebmj
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
. by guest on 23 July 2026 https://www.bmj.com/ Downloaded from 16 April 2024. 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378 on BMJ: first published asRESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
9 Wynants L, Van Calster B, Collins GS, et al. Prediction models for
diagnosis and prognosis of covid-19: systematic review and critical
appraisal. BMJ 2020;369:m1328. doi:10.1136/bmj.m1328
10 MallettS, Royston P, Dutton S, Waters R, Altman DG. Reporting
methods in studies developing prognostic models in cancer: a
review. BMC Med 2010;8:20. doi:10.1186/1741-7015-8-20
11 Collins GS, MallettS, Omar O, Yu LM. Developing riskprediction
models for type 2 diabetes: a systematic review of methodology
and reporting. BMC Med 2011;9:103. doi:10.1186/1741-7015-
9-103
12 Altman DG, Simera I, Hoey J, Moher D, Schulz K. EQUATOR: reporting
guidelines for health research. Open Med 2008;2:e49-50.
13 Glasziou P, Altman DG, Bossuyt P, et al. Reducing waste from
incomplete or unusable reports of biomedical research.
Lancet 2014;383:267-76. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(13)62228-X
14 Collins GS, de Groot JA, Dutton S, et al. External validation
of multivariable prediction models: a systematic review
of methodological conduct and reporting. BMC Med Res
Methodol 2014;14:40. doi:10.1186/1471-2288-14-40
15 Bouwmeester W, Zuithoff NP, MallettS, et al. Reporting and
methods in clinical prediction research: a systematic review. PLoS
Med 2012;9:1-12. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1001221
16 Collins GS, Reitsma JB, Altman DG, Moons KGM. Transparent
Reporting of a multivariable prediction model for Individual
Prognosis or Diagnosis (TRIPOD): the TRIPOD statement. Ann Intern
Med 2015;162:55-63. doi:10.7326/M14-0697
17 Moons KGM, Altman DG, Reitsma JB, et al. Transparent Reporting
of a multivariable prediction model for Individual Prognosis or
Diagnosis (TRIPOD): explanation and elaboration. Ann Intern
Med 2015;162:W1-73. doi:10.7326/M14-0698
18 Heus P, Reitsma JB, Collins GS, et al. Transparent Reporting of
Multivariable Prediction Models in Journal and Conference Abstracts:
TRIPOD for Abstracts. Ann Intern Med 2020;173:42-7. doi:10.7326/
M20-0193
19 DebrayTPA, Collins GS, Riley RD, et al. Transparent reporting of
multivariable prediction models developed or validated using
clustered data: TRIPOD-Cluster checklist. BMJ 2023;380:e071018.
doi:10.1136/bmj-2022-071018
20 DebrayTPA, Collins GS, Riley RD, et al. Transparent reporting of
multivariable prediction models developed or validated using
clustered data (TRIPOD-Cluster): explanation and elaboration.
BMJ 2023;380:e071058. doi:10.1136/bmj-2022-071058
21 Snell KIE, Levis B, Damen JAA, et al. Transparent reporting of
multivariable prediction models for individual prognosis or diagnosis:
checklist for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (TRIPOD-SRMA).
BMJ 2023;381:e073538. doi:10.1136/bmj-2022-073538
22 Dhiman P, Whittle R, Van Calster B, et al. The TRIPOD-P reporting
guideline for improving the integrity and transparency of predictive
analytics in healthcare through study protocols. Nat Mach
Intell 2023;5:816-7doi:10.1038/s42256-023-00705-6.
23 Riley RD, Snell KI, Ensor J, et al. Minimum sample size for developing
a multivariable prediction model: PART II - binary and time-to-event
outcomes. Stat Med 2019;38:1276-96. doi:10.1002/sim.7992
24 Riley RD, Snell KIE, Ensor J, et al. Minimum sample size for developing
a multivariable prediction model: Part I - Continuous outcomes. Stat
Med 2019;38:1262-75. doi:10.1002/sim.7993
25 Riley RD, Ensor J, Snell KIE, et al. Calculating the sample size required
for developing a clinical prediction model. BMJ 2020;368:m441.
doi:10.1136/bmj.m441
26 van Smeden M, de Groot JA, Moons KG, et al. No rationale for 1
variable per 10 events criterion for binary logistic regression analysis.
BMC Med Res Methodol 2016;16:163. doi:10.1186/s12874-016-
0267-3
27 van Smeden M, Moons KG, de Groot JA, et al. Sample size
for binary logistic prediction models: Beyond events per
variable criteria. Stat Methods Med Res 2019;28:2455-74.
doi:10.1177/0962280218784726
28 Snell KIE, Archer L, Ensor J, et al. External validation of clinical
prediction models: simulation-based sample size calculations were
more reliable than rules-of-thumb. J Clin Epidemiol 2021;135:79-89.
doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2021.02.011
29 Archer L, Snell KIE, Ensor J, Hudda MT, Collins GS, Riley RD. Minimum
sample size for external validation of a clinical prediction model with
a continuous outcome. Stat Med 2021;40:133-46. doi:10.1002/
sim.8766
30 Riley RD, DebrayTPA, Collins GS, et al. Minimum sample size for
external validation of a clinical prediction model with a binary
outcome. Stat Med 2021;40:4230-51. doi:10.1002/sim.9025
31 Riley RD, Collins GS, Ensor J, et al. Minimum sample size calculations
for external validation of a clinical prediction model with a time-to-
event outcome. Stat Med 2022;41:1280-95. doi:10.1002/sim.9275
32 Riley RD, Snell KIE, Archer L, et al. Evaluation of clinical prediction
models (part 3): calculating the sample size required for an external
validation study. BMJ 2024;384:e074821. doi:10.1136/bmj-2023-
074821
33 Wawira Gichoya J, McCoy LG, Celi LA, Ghassemi M. Equity in essence:
a call for operationalising fairness in machine learning for healthcare.
BMJ Health Care Inform 2021;28:e100289. doi:10.1136/
bmjhci-2020-100289
34 McDermott MBA, Wang S, MarinsekN, Ranganath R, Foschini L,
Ghassemi M. Reproducibility in machine learning for health research:
Still a ways to go. Sci Transl Med 2021;13:eabb1655. doi:10.1126/
scitranslmed.abb1655
35 UNESCO. UNESCO Recommendation on Open Science. 2023. https://
www.unesco.org/en/open-science/about?hub=686
36 Wessler BS, Nelson J, ParkJG, et al. ExternalValidations of
Cardiovascular Clinical Prediction Models: A Large-Scale Review of
the Literature. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes 2021;14:e007858.
doi:10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.121.007858
37 Dhiman P, Ma J, Andaur Navarro CL, et al. Methodological
conduct of prognostic prediction models developed using
machine learning in oncology: a systematic review. BMC Med Res
Methodol 2022;22:101. doi:10.1186/s12874-022-01577-x
38 Andaur Navarro CL, Damen JAA, van Smeden M, et al. Systematic
review identifies the design and methodological conduct of
studies on machine learning-based prediction models. J Clin
Epidemiol 2023;154:8-22. doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2022.11.015
39 Andaur Navarro CL, Damen JAA, Takada T, et al. Completeness
of reporting of clinical prediction models developed using
supervised machine learning: a systematic review. BMC Med Res
Methodol 2022;22:12. doi:10.1186/s12874-021-01469-6
40 Rech MM, de Macedo Filho L, White AJ, et al. Machine Learning
Models to Forecast Outcomes of PituitarySurgery: A Systematic
Review in Quality of Reporting and Current Evidence. Brain
Sci 2023;13:495. doi:10.3390/brainsci13030495
41 Munguía-Realpozo P, Etchegaray-Morales I, Mendoza-Pinto C, et
al. Current state and completeness of reporting clinical prediction
models using machine learning in systemic lupus erythematosus:
A systematic review. Autoimmun Rev 2023;22:103294.
doi:10.1016/j.autrev.2023.103294
42 Kee OT, Harun H, Mustafa N, et al. Cardiovascular complications in
a diabetes prediction model using machine learning: a systematic
review. Cardiovasc Diabetol 2023;22:13. doi:10.1186/s12933-
023-01741-7
43 Song Z, Yang Z, Hou M, Shi X. Machine learning in predicting cardiac
surgery-associated acute kidney injury: A systemic review and
meta-analysis. Front Cardiovasc Med 2022;9:951881. doi:10.3389/
fcvm.2022.951881
44 Yang Q, Fan X, Cao X, et al. Reporting and riskof bias of prediction
models based on machine learning methods in preterm birth: A
systematic review. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 2023;102:7-14.
doi:10.1111/aogs.14475
45 Groot OQ, OginkPT, Lans A, et al. Machine learning prediction models
in orthopedic surgery: A systematic review in transparent reporting. J
Orthop Res 2022;40:475-83. doi:10.1002/jor.25036
46 Lans A, Kanbier LN, Bernstein DN, et al. Social determinants of health
in prognostic machine learning models for orthopaedic outcomes:
A systematic review. J Eval Clin Pract 2023;29:292-9. doi:10.1111/
jep.13765
47 Li B, Feridooni T, Cuen-Ojeda C, et al. Machine learning in vascular
surgery: a systematic review and critical appraisal. NPJ Digit
Med 2022;5:7. doi:10.1038/s41746-021-00552-y
48 Groot OQ, Bindels BJJ, OginkPT, et al. Availability and reporting
quality of external validations of machine-learning prediction
models with orthopedic surgical outcomes: a systematic review. Acta
Orthop 2021;92:385-93. doi:10.1080/17453674.2021.1910448
49 Andaur Navarro CL, Damen JAA, Takada T, et al. Riskof bias in studies
on prediction models developed using supervised machine learning
techniques: systematic review. BMJ 2021;375:n2281. doi:10.1136/
bmj.n2281
50 Christodoulou E, Ma J, Collins GS, Steyerberg EW, Verbakel JY, Van
Calster B. A systematic review shows no performance benefit of
machine learning over logistic regression for clinical prediction
models. J Clin Epidemiol 2019;110:12-22. doi:10.1016/j.
jclinepi.2019.02.004
51 Yusuf M, Atal I, Li J, et al. Reporting quality of studies using machine
learning models for medical diagnosis: a systematic review. BMJ
Open 2020;10:e034568. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2019-034568
52 Wang W, KiikM, PeekN, et al. A systematic review of machine
learning models for predicting outcomes of stroke with structured
data. PLoS One 2020;15:e0234722. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0234722
53 Miles J, Turner J, Jacques R, Williams J, Mason S. Using machine-
learning riskprediction models to triage the acuity of undifferentiated
patients entering the emergency care system: a systematic review.
Diagn Progn Res 2020;4:16. doi:10.1186/s41512-020-00084-1
54 Dhiman P, Ma J, Navarro CA, et al. Reporting of prognostic clinical
prediction models based on machine learning methods in
oncology needs to be improved. J Clin Epidemiol 2021;138:60-72.
doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2021.06.024
thebmj|BMJ2024;385:e078378 | doi: 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378 13
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
. by guest on 23 July 2026 https://www.bmj.com/ Downloaded from 16 April 2024. 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378 on BMJ: first published asRESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
55 Dhiman P, Ma J, Andaur Navarro CL, et al. Riskof bias of prognostic
models developed using machine learning: a systematic review in
oncology. Diagn Progn Res 2022;6:13. doi:10.1186/s41512-022-
00126-w
56 Araújo ALD, MoraesMC, Pérez-de-Oliveira ME, etal. Machine learning
for the prediction oftoxicitiesfrom headandneckcancer treatment: A
systematicreview with meta-analysis. Oral Oncol 2023;140:106386.
doi:10.1016/j.oraloncology.2023.106386
57 Sheehy J, Rutledge H, Acharya UR, et al. Gynecological cancer
prognosis using machine learning techniques: A systematic
review of the last three decades (1990-2022). Artif Intell
Med 2023;139:102536. doi:10.1016/j.artmed.2023.102536
58 Collins GS, Whittle R, BullockGS, et al. Open science practices need
substantial improvement in prognostic model studies in oncology
using machine learning. J Clin Epidemiol 2024;165:111199.
doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2023.10.015
59 Dhiman P, Ma J, Andaur Navarro CL, et al. Overinterpretation
of findings in machine learning prediction model studies in
oncology: a systematic review. J Clin Epidemiol 2023;157:120-33.
doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2023.03.012
60 Andaur Navarro CL, Damen JAA, Takada T, et al. Systematic
review finds “spin” practices and poor reporting standards in
studies on machine learning-based prediction models. J Clin
Epidemiol 2023;158:99-110. doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2023.03.024
61 ChenIY,PiersonE,RoseS,JoshiS,FerrymanK,GhassemiM.
EthicalMachineLearninginHealthcare.AnnuRevBiomedData
Sci2021;4:123-44.doi:10.1146/annurev-biodatasci-092820-114757
62 Ganapathi S, Palmer J, Alderman JE, et al. Tackling bias in AI
health datasets through the STANDING Together initiative. Nat
Med 2022;28:2232-3. doi:10.1038/s41591-022-01987-w
63 Kadakia KT, Beckman AL, Ross JS, Krumholz HM. Leveraging Open
Science to Accelerate Research. N Engl J Med 2021;384:e61.
doi:10.1056/NEJMp2034518
64 Staniszewska S, Brett J, Simera I, et al. GRIPP2 reporting checklists:
tools to improve reporting of patient and public involvement in
research. BMJ 2017;358:j3453. doi:10.1136/bmj.j3453
65 Camaradou JCL, Hogg HDJ. Commentary: Patient Perspectives on
Artificial Intelligence; What have We Learned and How Should We
Move Forward?Adv Ther 2023;40:2563-72. doi:10.1007/s12325-
023-02511-3
66 Finlayson SG, Beam AL, van Smeden M. Machine Learning and
Statistics in Clinical Research Articles-Moving Past the False
Dichotomy. JAMA Pediatr 2023;177:448-50. doi:10.1001/
jamapediatrics.2023.0034
67 Sounderajah V, Ashrafian H, Golub RM, et al, STARD-AI Steering
Committee. Developing a reporting guideline for artificial intelligence-
centred diagnostic test accuracy studies: the STARD-AI protocol. BMJ
Open 2021;11:e047709. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2020-047709
68 Mongan J, Moy L, Kahn CEJr. Checklist for Artificial Intelligence in
Medical Imaging (CLAIM): A Guide for Authors and Reviewers. Radiol
Artif Intell 2020;2:e200029. doi:10.1148/ryai.2020200029
69 Vasey B, Nagendran M, Campbell B, et al, DECIDE-AI expert group.
Reporting guideline for the early-stage clinical evaluation of decision
support systems driven by artificial intelligence: DECIDE-AI. Nat
Med 2022;28:924-33. doi:10.1038/s41591-022-01772-9
70 Hawksworth C, Elvidge J, KniesS, et al. Protocol for the development
of an artificial intelligence extension to the Consolidated Health
Economic Evaluation Reporting Standards (CHEERS) 2022.
Health Economics; 2023. https://www.medrxiv.org/lookup/
doi/10.1101/2023.05.31.23290788
71 Rivera SC, Liu X, Chan AW, Denniston AK, Calvert MJ, SPIRIT-AI and
CONSORT-AI Working Group. Guidelines for clinical trial protocols for
interventions involving artificial intelligence: the SPIRIT-AI Extension.
BMJ 2020;370:m3210. doi:10.1136/bmj.m3210
72 LiuX, RiveraSC, Moher D, CalvertMJ, Denniston AK,SPIRIT-AI and
CONSORT-AIWorking Group. Reporting guidelinesfor clinicaltrial
reportsfor interventionsinvolving artificialintelligence: the CONSORT-
AI Extension. BMJ 2020;370:m3164. doi:10.1136/bmj.m3164
73 CacciamaniGE,ChuTN,SanfordDI,etal.PRISMAAIreportingguidelines
forsystematicreviewsandmeta-analysesonAIinhealthcare.Nat
Med2023;29:14-5.doi:10.1038/s41591-022-02139-w
74 Collins GS, Dhiman P, Ma J, et al. Evaluation of clinical prediction
models (part 1): from development to external validation.
BMJ 2024;384:e074819. doi:10.1136/bmj-2023-074819
75 Riley RD, Archer L, Snell KIE, et al. Evaluation of clinical prediction
models (part 2): how to undertake an external validation study.
BMJ 2024;384:e074820. doi:10.1136/bmj-2023-074820
76 Van Calster B, Steyerberg EW, Wynants L, van Smeden M. There is no
such thing as a validated prediction model. BMC Med 2023;21:70.
doi:10.1186/s12916-023-02779-w
77 Moher D, Schulz KF, Simera I, Altman DG. Guidance for developers of
health research reporting guidelines. PLoS Med 2010;7:e1000217.
doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1000217
78 Collins GS, Moons KGM. Reporting of artificial intelligence prediction
models. Lancet 2019;393:1577-9. doi:10.1016/S0140-
6736(19)30037-6
79 Collins GS, Dhiman P, Andaur Navarro CL, et al. Protocol for
development of a reporting guideline (TRIPOD-AI) and riskof bias
tool (PROBAST-AI) for diagnostic and prognostic prediction model
studies based on artificial intelligence. BMJ Open 2021;11:e048008.
doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2020-048008
80 GattrellWT, Logullo P,vanZuuren EJ, etal. ACCORD (ACcurate
COnsensusReporting Document): A reporting guideline for consensus
methodsin biomedicine developedvia a modifiedDelphi. PLoS
Med 2024;21:e1004326. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1004326
81 OlczakJ, Pavlopoulos J, Prijs J, et al. Presenting artificial intelligence,
deep learning, and machine learning studies to clinicians and
healthcare stakeholders: an introductory reference with a
guideline and a Clinical AI Research (CAIR) checklist proposal. Acta
Orthop 2021;92:513-25. doi:10.1080/17453674.2021.1918389
82 Norgeot B, Quer G, Beaulieu-Jones BK, et al. Minimum information
about clinical artificial intelligence modeling: the MI-CLAIM checklist.
Nat Med 2020;26:1320-4. doi:10.1038/s41591-020-1041-y
83 Hernandez-BoussardT, BozkurtS, Ioannidis JPA, Shah NH. MINIMAR
(MINimum Information for Medical AI Reporting): Developing
reporting standards for artificial intelligence in health care. J Am Med
Inform Assoc 2020;27:2011-5. doi:10.1093/jamia/ocaa088
84 Scott I, Carter S, Coiera E. Clinician checklist for assessing suitability
of machine learning applications in healthcare. BMJ Health Care
Inform 2021;28:e100251. doi:10.1136/bmjhci-2020-100251
85 Schwendicke F, Singh T, Lee JH, et al, IADR e-oral health network
and the ITU WHO focus group AI for Health. Artificial intelligence
in dental research: Checklist for authors, reviewers, readers. J
Dent 2021;107:103610. doi:10.1016/j.jdent.2021.103610
86 SendakMP, Gao M, Brajer N, Balu S. Presenting machine learning
model information to clinical end users with model facts labels. NPJ
Digit Med 2020;3:41. doi:10.1038/s41746-020-0253-3
87 Stevens LM, Mortazavi BJ, Deo RC, Curtis L, Kao DP. Recommendations
for Reporting Machine Learning Analyses in Clinical Research. Circ
Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes 2020;13:e006556. doi:10.1161/
CIRCOUTCOMES.120.006556
88 Kwong JCC, McLoughlin LC, Haider M, et al. Standardized Reporting
of Machine Learning Applications in Urology: The STREAM-URO
Framework. Eur Urol Focus 2021;7:672-82. doi:10.1016/j.
euf.2021.07.004
89 de Hond AAH, Leeuwenberg AM, Hooft L, et al. Guidelines and
quality criteria for artificial intelligence-based prediction models in
healthcare: a scoping review. NPJ Digit Med 2022;5:2. doi:10.1038/
s41746-021-00549-7
90 Wolff RF, Moons KGM, Riley RD, et al, PROBAST Group†. PROBAST: A
Tool to Assess the Riskof Bias and Applicability of Prediction Model
Studies. Ann Intern Med 2019;170:51-8. doi:10.7326/M18-1376
91 Moons KGM, Wolff RF, Riley RD, et al. PROBAST: A Tool to Assess Risk
of Bias and Applicability of Prediction ModelStudies: Explanation
and Elaboration. Ann Intern Med 2019;170:W1-33. doi:10.7326/
M18-1377
92 Ibrahim H, Liu X, Zariffa N, Morris AD, Denniston AK. Health data
poverty: an assailable barrier to equitable digital health care.
Lancet Digit Health 2021;3:e260-5. doi:10.1016/S2589-
7500(20)30317-4
93 McCradden MD, Joshi S, Mazwi M, Anderson JA. Ethical limitations of
algorithmic fairness solutions in health care machine learning.
Lancet Digit Health 2020;2:e221-3. doi:10.1016/S2589-
7500(20)30065-0
94 Mccradden M, Odusi O, Joshi S, et al. What’s fair is… fair? Presenting
JustEFAB, an ethical framework for operationalizing medical ethics
and social justice in the integration of clinical machine learning:
JustEFAB. In: 2023 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability,
andTransparency. ACM 2023;1505-19. https://dl.acm.org/
doi/10.1145/3593013.3594096.
95 Thibault RT, Amaral OB, Argolo F, Bandrowski AE, Davidson AR,
Drude NI. Open Science 2.0: Towards a truly collaborative research
ecosystem. PLoS Biol 2023;21:e3002362. doi:10.1371/journal.
pbio.3002362
96 Riley R, Tierney J, Stewart L, eds. Individual participant data
meta-analysis: a handbook for healthcare research. Wiley,
2021doi:10.1002/9781119333784.
Supplementary table 1: TRIPOD+AI Expanded
Checklist (Explanation & Elaboration Light)
Supplementarytable2:FillableTRIPOD+AIchecklist
Supplementary table 3: Aggregated TRIPOD+AI
responses from Delphi round 1
Supplementary table 4: Aggregated TRIPOD+AI
responses from Delphi round 2
14 doi: 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378|BMJ2024;385:e078378 | thebmj
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
. by guest on 23 July 2026 https://www.bmj.com/ Downloaded from 16 April 2024. 10.1136/bmj-2023-078378 on BMJ: first published as