Research & Policy Briefs
From the World Bank Malaysia Hub
No. 64 July 04, 2024
Implications of Heightened Global Uncertainty for the East Asia and Pacific Region
Jongrim Ha, Ergys Islamaj, and Aaditya Mattoo1
Macroeconomic, financial, and policy-related uncertainty have increased since the COVID-19 pandemic globally and in individual
developing economies in the East Asia and Pacific region. Uncertainty shocks can transmit across borders and their economic
consequence is quite sizeable, affecting both the financial sector and the real economy in the EAP region.
Introduction Box 1 presents more details about the measurement of
different types of uncertainty.
Extensive literature documents heightened economic
uncertainty since the COVID-19 pandemic (Cascaldi-Garcia et Macroeconomic uncertainty is elevated in the United
al. 2023). All types of uncertainty have increased: States, reflecting uncertain future output growth and inflation
macroeconomic, financial, economic policy, geopolitical, and developments (figure 1, panel a). After peaking in April 2020 at
trade uncertainty. However, less is known about the the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, it spiked again in 2022,
implications of global uncertainty for emerging markets and mainly due to a surge in inflation. Despite the decline since
developing economies (EMDEs) in the East Asia and Pacific mid-2022, inflation uncertainty is still high in the United States,
(EAP) region. This Research and Policy Brief examines the reflecting disagreements on the speed and degree of the future
effects of global uncertainty on EAP by addressing the following (dis)inflation process. Global economic policy uncertainty,
questions. First, what are the basic sources of economic which aggregates future monetary, fiscal, and financial policies,
uncertainty? Second, how has uncertainty evolved globally and is twice as high as the pre-pandemic levels (figure 1, panel b). In
in individual EAP EMDEs in recent decades? Third, how has the United States, debates continue about the path of future
global uncertainty affected macroeconomic and financial monetary policy decisions by the Federal Reserve; the
conditions in EAP? monetary policy uncertainty index has stayed persistently
above the long-term averages since 2020. Similarly, financial
The empirical results suggest that the effects of
uncertainty (VIX) surged in 2020 and 2022 and, despite
uncertainty—mainly related to the volatility (second moment)
declines, remains above pre-pandemic levels (figure 1, panel c).
of the variables—are distinctive from the effects of the level
(first moment) fluctuations in underlying business, financial, Uncertainty regarding future output, inflation, financial
and policy variables. The economic consequences of the markets, and economic policies is higher than before the
uncertainty shocks are quite sizeable, almost comparable to pandemic in many EAP countries. Macro uncertainty, which
the effects of the “level” shocks. In addition, the results suggest suffered from record-high levels in 2020–21 (output uncertainty)
that different types of uncertainty shocks affect EAP countries or 2022 (inflation uncertainty), has generally declined since
differently, individually and as a group cause somewhat 2023 (figure 2). That said, uncertainty measures are at levels
heterogeneous effects on EAP countries. In terms of cumulative above pre-pandemic ones, and in some countries (Thailand),
effect, macro uncertainty, followed by financial and economic output and inflation uncertainty are still increasing. News-based
policy uncertainty, contributes the most to the variations in the economic policy uncertainty remains elevated—particularly in
key domestic variables in EAP. In particular, macro uncertainty China. Survey-based uncertainty indicators on short- and
can explain up to one-quarter of variations in macro variables in long-term interest rates, which are typically a critical
EAP. determinant of investment, have increased across all EAP
economies (World Bank 2023).
Evolution of global and EAP economic uncertainty
Economic effects of heightened uncertainty
Global economic uncertainty rose sharply to a record-high level
after the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic and stayed To assess the effects of global uncertainty on EAP, a series of
elevated through 2023 and early 2024.This Brief discusses structural vector autoregressive (SVAR) models are estimated
the effect of global uncertainty on macroeconomic and over 2000–19 for five EAP countries: China, Indonesia,
financial conditions in the EAP. It highlights three types of Malaysia, the Philippines, and Thailand. The models consist of a
uncertainty: macroeconomic uncertainty–forecast-based measures; set of macro and financial variables in the United States (or
policy uncertainty–news-based measures; and financial global measures), China, and individual EAP countries. China,
uncertainty–stock market volatility-based measures. Where a the largest EMDE, is taken separately in the model to reflect its
global index is unavailable, US uncertainty indexes are used as role as both a source and a recipient of global uncertainty
proxies for global uncertainty, as is common in the literature. shocks. Three sources of uncertainty are distinguished:
1Affiliations: Aaditya Mattoo is the Chief Economist of East Asia Pacific, World Bank. Jongrim Ha is with the Prospects Group (DECPG), World Bank. Ergys Islamaj is with the East
Asia and Pacific Chief Economist Office, World Bank.
Acknowledgements: Nancy Morrison provided editorial assistance.
Objective and disclaimer: Research & Policy Briefs synthetize existing research and data to shed light on a useful and interesting question for policy debate. Research & Policy Briefs
carry the names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions are entirely those of the authors. They do not necessarily represent
the views of the World Bank Group, its Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.
dezirohtuA
erusolcsiD
cilbuP
dezirohtuA
erusolcsiD
cilbuP
dezirohtuA
erusolcsiD
cilbuP
dezirohtuA
erusolcsiD
cilbuP
Implications of Heightened Global Uncertainty
for the East Asia and Pacific Region
Box 1. Empirical methodology and data Model. Both country-specific and panel SVAR models are run.
Country models provide more detailed county-specific results,
This Research and Policy Brief takes two sequential empirical while the panel model is more efficient and clearer to present but
steps: (1) measuring uncertainty; and (2) estimating SVAR models loses country-specific results. This Brief reports the results based
to quantify the economic effects of global uncertainty on EAP. on panel SVARs. Country-specific results are featured as
robustness or sensitivity checks. In identifying the uncertainty
Measures of uncertainty shocks, the Brief employs recursive restriction. Following the
The Brief employs various measures of uncertainty based on the previous literature—such as Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016); Leduc
extensive literature and authors’ calculations. and Lui (2016)—and to overcome the endogeneity problem, the
uncertainty measures are ordered last (along with various control
• Forecast-based measures. To gauge macroeconomic uncertainty,
variables to reduce the endogeneity).
this set of measures relies on economic forecasting models for
a variable of interest. For instance, a vector autoregressive Data set. The analyses are based on monthly macroeconomic and
(VAR) model is recursively estimated, and the standard financial data for the global analysis, US analysis, and analysis of
deviation of the forecast error for the variable of interest is EAP countries in a panel setup. Where a global index is
assumed to reflect the uncertainty in the variable. unavailable, US uncertainty indexes are used as proxies for global
• Survey-based measures. This set of measures uses economic uncertainty, in keeping with the literature. The sample period is
surveys from professional forecasters on a variable of interest: 2000–19. Main endogenous variables (in this order) are: US
output, inflation, short- and long-term interest rates, and (global) output, inflation, uncertainty measure, domestic output,
current account. The uncertainty is measured as the survey inflation, exchange rates, equity prices, and domestic uncertainty
measure. Control variables are: volatility (VIX) index, US monetary
responses' standard deviation or cross-sectional differences,
policy instrument, time trends, and commodity prices. EAP
such as inter-quartile ranges.
countries in the sample include China, Indonesia, Malaysia, the
• News-based measures. To gauge policy uncertainty, this set of
Philippines, and Thailand. These countries were selected after
measures uses a keyword-searching algorithm. An example is
considering the economic scale and the availability of uncertainty
the algorithm used by Baker et al. (2016) and Husted et al.
data. China, which is the largest emerging market and developing
(2020), which puts together economic policy uncertainty in the
economy (EMDE), is taken separately in a model that includes both
United States and other economies by searching the keywords
global (US) and Chinese variables. Three types of uncertainty
for momentary, fiscal, and other policies in the local newspapers.
measures are tested: macroeconomic, financial, and policy. For
China’s uncertainty measures, the dataset in Ahir et al. (2022) is
Structural vector autoregressive (SVAR) models
also employed.
An open-economy model characterizes the data-generating process
Robustness checks. The main empirical results are tested using
as follows:
alternative modeling [factor-augmented vector autoregressive
AY t =∑ i p =1 B i Y t-i +∑ j q =0 C j X t-j +ε t . (FAVAR) framework], alternative measures of uncertainty,
different ordering of the variables, the inclusion of other control
Y t is an n×1 vector of endogenous macroeconomic and financial variables—in particular, the different types of uncertainty measures
variables. X t is exogenous regressors. A, B i ( A i ≥ 1), and C j ( A j ≥ 0) and the inclusion of post-pandemic data, among others. The
are nonsingular coefficient matrices. ε t is an n×1 structural results confirm that the key empirical results are robust to these
disturbances vector and serially uncorrelated. alternative models.
Figure 1. Evolution of uncertainty in the global economy and the United States
a. US macroeconomic uncertainty b. Global economic policy uncertainty c. US financial uncertainty (VIX)
and US monetary policy uncertainty
1.3 Macro uncertainly 450 Global EPU US MPU (RHS) 350
GDP uncertainty (RHS) 400 300
1.2 Inflation uncertainty (RHS) 350
250
300
1.1 250 200
200 150
1.0
150
100
0.9 100
50
50
0.8 0 0
2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020
Source: World Bank estimates; Haver Analytics; Baker, Bloom, and Davis 2016; Jurado, Ludvigson, and Ng 2015.
Note: In panel a, macroeconomic uncertainty is based on forecast-based measures by Jurado, Ludvigson, and Ng (2015). The long-term average is 0.9. GDP and inflation
uncertainty are based on a standard deviation of Consensus Forecasts for US GDP and Consumer Price Index (CPI) inflation. In panel b, the Global Economic Policy Uncertainty
(EPU) and US Monetary Policy Uncertainty (MPU) index are based on news-based measures by Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016). In panels b and c, the horizontal lines indicate
the long-term average (set to 100). RHS = right-hand side.
2
Research & Policy Brief No.64
Figure 2. Evolution of economic uncertainty in the East Asia and Pacific region
a. Macroeconomic uncertainty b. Financial and policy uncertainty
2.5 China policy uncertainty
EAP long-term rate uncertainty (RHS)
GDP uncertainty 700 EAP short-term rate uncertainty (RHS) 1.0
2.0 Inflation uncertainly
600
0.8
500
1.5
0.6
400
1.0 300
0.4
200
0.5 0.2
100
0.0 0 0.0
2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020
Source: World Bank estimates; Consensus Economics; Baker, Bloom, and Davis 2016.
Note: In panel a, EAP macroeconomic uncertainty is based on the average cross-sectional standard deviation of Consensus Forecast surveys for four emerging markets and
developing economies (EMDEs) in EAP (China, Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand). In panel b, China policy uncertainty is based on news-based measures by Baker et al. (2016). EAP
financial uncertainty is based on the average standard deviation of Consensus Forecasts for 3-month Treasury bill yields and 10-year bond yields in the four EAP countries. EAP
= East Asia and Pacific; RHS = right-hand side.
macroeconomic, financial, and policy (for estimation details, impacts on key domestic financial variables in EAP, although
see box 1). their impacts are overall more immediate but short-lived
compared with macro uncertainty (figure 3, panel c). Following
The findings suggest that global uncertainty shocks have
a one- standard-deviation VIX shock, average stock prices in
negatively affected macro and financial conditions in EAP
EAP declined by 1.2 percent, which is comparable to the effects
countries. This result is statistically and economically significant
of a negative shock on US equity prices (-1.6 percent). The
based on average results (that is, based on the panel
effects of policy uncertainty shocks appear to add another layer
model), as well as in country-specific perspectives—the
of negative effects on EAP countries. While US monetary
results hold for all EAP countries in the sample. Following a
tightening led to a decline in EAP stock prices by up to 1.4
one-standard-deviation increase in US macro uncertainty,
percent, heightened US monetary policy uncertainty resulted
growth of output declined by 0.5 percent and stock prices
in another 0.7 percent decline in stock prices.
declined by 3.0 percent in EAP within one year after the shock
(figure 3, panels a and b). The effects are stronger than the The sizeable uncertainty effects reflect various channels of
effects from a one-standard-deviation decline in US output (by international transmission of uncertainty shocks. First of all, the
0.3 percent and 1.0 percent, respectively). Global financial dynamic responses of the macro variables are consistent with
market and economic policy uncertainty also had significant the theories on the economic effects of uncertainty—typically
Figure 3. Impact of US uncertainty on the East Asia and Pacific region
a. EAP output responses to negative US b. EAP stock price responses to c. EAP stock price responses to US
output and macro uncertainty shocks negative US stock price and monetary policy tightening and
financial uncertainty shocks monetary policy uncertainty shocks
Percent Percent Percent
0.6 1.0 0.0
0.4 0.5
0.2 0.0 -0.5
0.0
-0.5
-0.2 -1.0
-1.0
-0.4
-0.6 -1.5 -1.5
-0.8 -2.0
-1.0 -2.5 -2.0
t=0 6 12 24 t=0 6 12 24 t=0 6 12 24 t=0 6 12 24 t=0 6 12 24 t=0 6 12 24
Negative US Marco uncertainly Negative US US financial US monetary policy US monetary policy
output shock shock stock prices uncertainty (VIX) shock uncertainty shock
Source: World Bank estimates; Jarocińksy and Karadi 2020.
Note: The results are based on panel vector autoregressions estimated with a sample for January 2000 through December 2019 for the United States and four emerging
markets and developing economies (EMDEs) in EAP (Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand). The model includes, in this order, the following measures: the US production,
US Consumer Price Index (CPI), US uncertainty; and domestic (EAP) industrial production, prices, stock prices, exchange rates, and uncertainty. Panel a shows dynamic
responses of EAP industrial production to a one-standard-deviation increase in macroeconomic uncertainty and decline in output. Bars indicate the median responses, and
vertical lines indicate 16 percent–84 percent confidence intervals. Panel b shows dynamic responses of EAP equity prices to a one-standard-deviation increase in financial
uncertainty (VIX) and decline in US equity prices. Panel c shows dynamic responses of EAP stock prices to US monetary policy tightening shock and US monetary policy
uncertainty shock. EAP = East Asia and Pacific.
3
Implications of Heightened Global Uncertainty
for the East Asia and Pacific Region
Figure 4. Impact of United States and China uncertainty on the East Asia and Pacific region
a. China output and stock price responses to b. EAP responses to heightened uncertainty
heightened macro uncertainty in the in China
United States
Percent Percent
0.2 0.3
0.2
0.0 0.1
0.0
-0.2 -0.1
-0.2
-0.4 -0.3
-0.4
-0.6 -0.5
-0.6
-0.8
-0.7
-1.0 t=0 6 12 24 t=0 6 12 24
t=0 6 12 24 t=0 6 12 24 EAP output to EAP prices to
China macro China macro
Industrial production CPI inflation
uncertainly uncertainly
Source: World Bank estimates.
Note: The results are based on a panel Vector autoregression estimated for January 2000 through December 2019 for four emerging markets and developing economies
(EMDEs) in EAP (Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand). The model includes, in this order, the US production, US Consumer Price Index (CPI), US uncertainty measure; China
production, China CPI, China uncertainty measure; and domestic (EAP) industrial production, prices, stock prices, exchange rates, and uncertainty measures. In panel a, bars
show dynamic responses of China industrial production and CPI to a one-standard-deviation increase in macroeconomic uncertainty in the United States. In panel b, bars show
dynamic responses of EAP production to a one-standard-deviation increase in macroeconomic uncertainty in the United States and China. EAP = East Asia and Pacific.
on the “wait-and-see” channel that strains private investment recipient of uncertainty shocks in the global markets,
and consumption (Binder 2017; Bloom 2009). In particular, high particularly in connection with EAP countries.
levels of macro uncertainty have a negative impact on
investment growth, as investors become hesitant to invest in Conclusion
new projects or expand their existing businesses (Leduc and Liu
The findings lead to at least two types of novel implications.
2016). Second, the reactions of financial asset prices and
First, the effects of uncertainty—which is mainly related to the
increases in credit costs also contribute to the contractionary
volatility (second moment) of the variables—are distinctive
effects of economic uncertainty. Third, following the
from the effects of the level (first moment) fluctuations in
heightened global and US uncertainty, the uncertainty
underlying business, financial, and policy variables. The
indicators in individual EAP countries also responded
economic consequence of the uncertainty shocks is quite
significantly, which supports the narratives of internationally
sizeable, almost comparable to the effects of the “level”
correlated risk and uncertainty (Londono et al. 2021).
shocks. These findings are quite robust across different types of
The heightened uncertainty in the domestic economy
uncertainty measures—specifically, across macro, financial,
is estimated to have played a negative role in economic
and policy uncertainties. Second, the results suggest that
confidence/sentiments in EAP countries (Ha and So 2023).
different types of uncertainty shocks affect EAP countries
Estimation results also suggest that while China was differently, individually and as a group. In terms of cumulative
negatively affected by the global and US uncertainty shocks, its effect, macro uncertainty, followed by financial and economic
own uncertainty shocks had an impact on the macroeconomic policy uncertainty, contributes the most to the variations in the
and financial conditions in EAP (figure 4). Following a key domestic variables in EAP. In particular, macro uncertainty,
one-standard-deviation increase in macro uncertainty in China, which explains up to 40 percent of total variations in US output
industrial production in EAP countries declined by around 0.3 and prices, can explain up to one-quarter of variations in macro
percent—about half of the responses to the same type of US variables in EAP. This result is in line with the findings of Stock
uncertainty. Again, China's heightened policy uncertainty was and Watson (2012), who argue that the global uncertainty
followed by heightened uncertainty in EAP countries. These shock has been a key driver of global recessions and other
results collectively suggest that China is both a source and severe fluctuations.
References
Ahir, H., N. Bloom, and D. Furceri. 2022. “The World Uncertainty Index.” NBER Working Paper 29763, Jarociński, M., and P. Karadi. 2020. “Deconstructing Monetary Policy Surprises—The Role of Information
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Shocks.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 12 (2): 1–43.
Baker, S. R., N. Bloom, and S. J. Davis. 2016. “Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty.” Quarterly Journal of Jurado, K., S. C. Ludvigson, and S. Ng. 2015. “Measuring Uncertainty.” American Economic Review 105 (3):
Economics 131 (4): 1593–1636. 1177–1216.
Binder, C. C. 2017. “Measuring Uncertainty Based on Rounding: New Method and Application to Inflation Leduc, S., and Z. Liu. 2016. “Uncertainty Shocks Are Aggregate Demand Shocks.” Journal of Monetary
Expectations.” Journal of Monetary Economics 90 (October): 1–12. Economics 82 (September): 20–35.
B loom, N. 2009. “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks.” Econometrica 77 (3): 623–85. Londono, J. M., S. Ma, and B. A. Wilson. 2021. “The Global Transmission of Real Economic Uncertainty.”
Cascaldi-Garcia, D., C. Sarisoy, J. M. Londono, B. Sun, D. D. Datta, T. Ferreira, O. Grishchenko, M. R. International Finance Discussion Paper 1317, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
Jahan-Parvar, F. Loria, S. Ma, M. Rodriguez, I. Zer, and J. Rogers. 2023. "What Is Certain about Washington, DC.
Uncertainty?" Journal of Economic Literature 61 (2): 624–54. Stock, J. H., and M. W. Watson. 2012. “Disentangling the Channels of the 2007–2009 Recession.” NBER
Ha, J., and I. So. 2023. “Global Confidence, Uncertainty, and Business Cycles. Uncertainty, and Business Working Paper 18094, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Cycles.” International Journal of Central Banking 19 (1): 451–95. World Bank. 2023. “World Bank East Asia and Pacific Economic Update, April 2023: Services for
Husted, L., J. Rogers, and B. Sun. 2020. “Monetary Policy Uncertainty.” Journal of Monetary Economics 115: 20–36. Development.” Washington, DC: World Bank.
4