sustainability
Review
Corporate Default Predictions Using Machine
Learning: Literature Review
Hyeongjun Kim 1, Hoon Cho 2 and Doojin Ryu 3,*
1 Department of Business Administration, Yeungnam University, Gyeongsan 38541, Korea; hkim@yu.ac.kr
2 College of Business, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul 02455, Korea;
hooncho@kaist.ac.kr
3 College of Economics, Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul 03063, Korea
* Correspondence: doojin.ryu@gmail.com
Received: 22 July 2020; Accepted: 31 July 2020; Published: 6 August 2020


Abstract: Corporate default predictions play an essential role in each sector of the economy,
as highlighted by the global financial crisis and the increase in credit risk. This study reviews
the corporate default prediction literature from the perspectives of financial engineering and machine
learning. We define three generations of statistical models: discriminant analyses, binary response
models, and hazard models. In addition, we introduce three representative machine learning
methodologies: support vector machines, decision trees, and artificial neural network algorithms.
For both the statistical models and machine learning methodologies, we identify the key studies used
in corporate default prediction. By comparing these methods with findings from the interdisciplinary
literature, ourreviewsuggestssomenewtasksinthefieldofmachinelearningforpredictingcorporate
defaults. First, a corporate default prediction model should be a multi-period model in which future
outcomes are affected by past decisions. Second, the stock price and the corporate value determined
by the stock market are important factors to use in default predictions. Finally, a corporate default
prediction model should be able to suggest the cause of default.
Keywords: classification; default prediction; financial engineering; forecasting; machine learning
JEL Classification: G10; G17; G33
1. Introduction
Forecasts of corporate defaults are used in various fields across the economy. Corporations can
diagnose their current statuses based on prediction models and establish their strategies. Executives
can run their businesses more stably by managing key indicators that affect corporate default risk.
Investors can revise their strategies and improve their portfolios by examining the likelihood of
corporate defaults. Additionally, governments can establish macroprudential policies and improve
related financial regulations using corporate default predictions. In these ways, default prediction
models help in designing and improving the financial system. Moreover, by employing machine
learning algorithms and statistical models, corporate default predictions are at the cutting edge of
advanced financial engineering. The recent global financial crisis and the increase in credit risk
highlight the importance of this field. Because of their importance, corporate default predictions have
been extensively studied since the work of Beaver [1].
Thus far, several structural models have been used to explain corporate defaults. Merton [2]
develops the “distance-to-default” measure of corporate default risk using a Black-Scholes-type pricing
model. Ina recentstudy, JessenandLando[3]confirmthat thedistance-to-defaultmeasurecanrobustly
detect corporate default risk. They also present a distance-to-default measure with an adjustment
Sustainability 2020, 12, 6325; doi:10.3390/su12166325 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainabilitySustainability 2020, 12, 6325 2 of 11
using the stochastic volatility of the value of assets. Glover [4] proposes a structural model to calculate
a corporation’s expected default costs. Brogaard et al. [5] use the distance-to-default approach to
show that enhanced stock liquidity reduces corporate default risk. Hillegeist et al. [6] argue that a
market-based measure based on the Black–Scholes–Merton model performs better than Altman’s [7]
Z-score and Ohlson’s [8] O-score when assessing a discrete hazard model. Duffie et al. [9] propose a
doubly stochastic model to estimate the term structure of corporate default risk. Recently, however,
reduced-form models with statistical approaches and machine learning algorithms that predict the
likelihood of a corporate default provide more satisfactory results than structural models in general.
In this study, we review the corporate default prediction literature from the perspectives of
financial engineering and machine learning simultaneously. We attempt to identify new opportunities
in the field of machine learning for predicting corporate defaults by comparing these kinds of
literature. This study therefore examines the research on corporate default forecasts thus far and
introduces representative methodologies and major studies by categorizing statistical approaches and
machine learning techniques. We define three generations of the main statistical models for corporate
default forecasting as discriminant analyses, binary response models, and hazard models, and then
we study each generation. Among machine learning algorithms, classification methodologies are
mainly used in this setting, and support vector machines (SVMs), decision trees, and artificial neural
network algorithms are typical. There are already several studies reviewing the field of bankruptcy
prediction [10–13]. However, we will focus on discovering new research topics and challenges in
this study. The development of machine learning methodologies is expected to further accelerate
innovation in the financial sector, leading to the emergence of new financial services and the rise of the
data economy based on the distribution of data.
Before starting the review, we need to set the scope of the investigation. In this study, we define
the financial literature as academic journals covering the following areas: accounting, finance, financial
economics, economics, and econometrics. The machine learning literature includes academic papers
covering computer science, statistics, and operations research. We search the databases, Google
Scholar and EBSCOhost, to exhaustively collect the related literature. The keywords used for the
search are “corporate default prediction,” or “bankruptcy prediction.” We also include the keyword
“machine learning” when we find the machine learning literature. After we construct our own
classification system, we use the name of each methodology as additional keywords. The citation
count (e.g., Journal Citation Reports–Clarivate Analytics) is mainly used for thesis selection, but our
subjective evaluations are also considered.
This study explores various techniques and algorithms used for corporate default predictions.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 focuses on statistical approaches for
corporate default predictions, and Section 3 reviews several machine learning techniques. Section 4
concludes the study.
2. Corporate Default Prediction Using Statistical Approaches
Corporate default forecasts using statistical models can be largely classified into three generations.
Table 1 shows these three primary methodologies and their representative studies. Various studies
have been conducted as each methodology has expanded, and these methods are actively used to
this day.Sustainability 2020, 12, 6325 3 of 11
Table 1. Classification of statistical models for corporate default prediction.
Statistical Approaches References
Discriminant Analyses Beaver (1966); Altman (1968); Mare et al. (2017)
Binary Response Models
Ohlson (1980); Zmijewski (1984); Foreman (2003); Campbell et al. (2008);
Kukuk and Rönnberg (2013); Aretz et al. (2018)
Hazard Models
Shumway (2001); Chava and Jarrow (2004); Nam et al. (2008);
Bonfim (2009); Dakovic et al. (2010); Duan et al. (2012);
Figlewski et al. (2012); Tian et al. (2015); Traczynski (2017)
2.1. Discriminant Analysis
Studies in the first generation of the corporate default literature use discriminant analysis.
Discriminant analysis is a default prediction methodology that has been widely used since the
work of Beaver [1] and Altman [7]. These studies build reduced-form default prediction models
using discriminant analysis and provide ordinal rankings of default risk by generating credit scores.
The famous Altman Z-score is one example, and subsequent studies use this methodology [14,15].
Discriminant analysis selects the variables that can best determine whether a company is bankrupt
and calculates the discriminant function as a linear combination of these variables, as follows:
D = β0 +β1X1 +··· +βmXm, (1)
where D is the discriminant score calculated by the discriminant function, β0 is a constant, βm is an
estimated coefficient, and Xm is an explanatory variable. An observation is classified as normal if the
discrimination score is below a certain threshold and is classified as being in default if the score is
above that threshold. However, discriminant analysis requires the assumption that the independent
variables follow multivariate normal distributions, the covariance matrix between the two groups is
defined as normal, and defaults are identical [16]. The discriminant analysis does have the advantage
that corporations can be ranked according to their degree of default risk.
2.2. Binary Response Models
The second generation of corporate default predictions uses binary response models. A binary
response model is a model that defines a corporation’s state as either normal (= 0) or in default (= 1).
It estimates the probability of a default using explanatory variables and applies a logistic or probit
function in most cases. A representative example is the O-score with a logistic function, introduced
by Ohlson [8], whereas Zmijewski [17] tests corporate default risk using a probit model. These
binary models allow bankruptcy probabilities to be calculated over the next period. As Foreman [18]
and Charitou et al. [16] explain, the binary response model defines the probability that corporation
n = 1, ... , N defaults, Pn, as follows:
Pn(yn = 1) = 1/(1 + e−z
) = 1/{1 + exp[ −(β0 + β1 × 1,n + β2X2,n + ... + βmXm,n)]}, (2)
where yn = 1 if corporation n defaults and 0 otherwise. Pn(yn = 1) is the probability of default for
corporation n, β1, β2, ... , βm are slope coefficients, and X1,n, X2,n, ... , Xm,n are explanatory variables
for corporation n.
The likelihood function is given by
L =
YN
n=1
F(β0
Xn)yn
(1−F(β0
Xn))1−yn
, (3)
where F(β’Xn) = 1/{1 + exp[−(β0 + β1X1,n + β2X2,n + ... + βmXm,n)]}. The coefficients can be estimated
using the maximum likelihood technique.Sustainability 2020, 12, 6325 4 of 11
A binary response model has several advantages over discriminant analysis for corporate default
forecasting. First, a binary response model does not require any assumptions about the probability
of default or the distributions of the predictor variables. Second, it can test the significance of
individual independent variables. Lastly, it can be used to calculate the probability of default in
the next period. Campbell et al. [19] extend the binary response model by investigating corporate
defaults using a multiple logit model. This approach allows us to calculate corporate default
probabilities and predict default risk over several periods. Aretz et al. [20] adopt Campbell et al.’s [19]
methodology and use data for non-U.S. companies to identify a significantly positive default risk
premium. Kukuk and Rönnberg [21] extend the binary response model by proposing a mixed logit
model that allows stochastic parameters and non-linearities in the regressor variables. Bonfim [22]
tests macroeconomic and financial data using a probit model and argues that corporate defaults are
driven by multiple firm-specific factors. However, the results show that macroeconomic factors are
also important in estimating default risk over time.
2.3. Hazard Models
The third generation of corporate default predictions includes studies using hazard models.
Shumway [23] uses a duration analysis with a hazard model and shows that this approach predicts
corporate defaults better than traditional single-period models do. The hazard model is also referred to
as survival analysis and can be used to calculate the probability of a corporate default over time. This
default prediction methodology uses Cox’s [24] hazard regression model by defining a corporation’s
status as either normal (= 0) or in default (= 1). The corporation’s status is no longer observed once a
default event occurs. Assuming that T is the time at which a company defaults, company’s survival
function at time t can be expressed as follows:
S(t) = Pr(T ≥ t) (4)
Thehazardfunction,λ(t),indicatestheinstantaneousfailurerateattimetandisdefinedas follows:
λ(t) = lim
∆t→0+
Pr(t ≤ T< t + ∆t|T ≥ t)
∆t
(5)
The Cox proportional hazard model defines the instantaneous failure rate, λ(t), as being
proportional to the unspecified baseline hazard rate, λ0 (t), as follows:
λ(t|Xn) = λ0(t)exp(β0
Xn) (6)
whereβisacolumnvectorcomposedofregressioncoefficients,andXn isthesetofexplanatoryvariables
for the nth company. The Cox model is a semi-parametric model consisting of a non-parametric base
risk rate λ0(t) and a parametric factor exp(β’Xn). The partial likelihood function for the regression
coefficient β is calculated as follows:
PL(β) =
N Y
i=1

      
exp(β0Xi)
PN
j=1 Yijexp(β0Xi)

      
δi
(7)
where Yij is an indicator variable equal to one if tj ≥ ti and zero otherwise. δi is an indicator variable
equal to one when an observation is not censored and zero otherwise. The parameters are estimated
such that the partial likelihood function is maximized.
The hazard model is developed further by many subsequent studies. Chava and Jarrow [25]
confirm that the hazard model exhibits superior prediction performance, and they address the
importance of industry effects and market variables. Nam et al. [26] extend Shumway’s [23] analysis
by including time-varying covariates to incorporate macroeconomic dependencies. Dakovic et al. [27]Sustainability 2020, 12, 6325 5 of 11
fit a generalized linear mixed model, including unobserved heterogeneity between industry sectors,
into a discrete hazard model, and show that the new model outperforms conventional models with
Altman’s [7] variables. Duan, Sun, and Wang [28] develop a forward intensity model from the hazard
model and predict corporate default probabilities over multiple periods. Traczynski [29] extends the
hazard model by taking a Bayesian model-averaging approach and shows that this approach leads
to a better prediction performance relative to other typical models. Figlewski et al. [30] evaluate
the effect of macroeconomic conditions on corporate default risk using reduced-form Cox intensity
models. Tian et al. [31] use a variable selection technique with a discrete hazard model and demonstrate
that the variables selected using the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator can improve
prediction performance.
3. Corporate Default Prediction Using Machine Learning Techniques
Samuel [32] proposes the concept of machine learning and defines it as “a discipline that gives
computers the ability to learn without a clear program”. Mitchell [33] further develops this notion
of machine learning, saying, “a computer program is said to learn from experience E with respect
to some class of tasks T and performance measures P, if its performance at tasks in T, as measured
by P, improves with experience.” In this regard, a machine learning algorithm for corporate default
prediction can be described as a series of processes that improve the default indicator (P) to perform
the task of predicting corporate credit risk (T) using actual corporate credit information (E). Researches
on corporate default prediction using machine learning techniques are conducted in various ways,
especially in the field of computer science, and Barboza et al. [34] argue that machine learning models
exhibit better performances in predicting the corporate bankruptcy. Table 2 shows three important
methodologies and their representative studies. In most cases, a default prediction using machine
learning adopts a classification problem that categorizes a company’s status as being in one of two
or more states, defined as normal (= 0) and in default (= 1), and it calculates the probability that
the company is in a specific state. Thus, machine learning algorithms for solving classification
problems are primarily used; representative examples include SVMs, decision trees, and artificial
neural network algorithms.
Table 2. Classification of machine learning techniques for corporate default prediction.
Machine Learning Techniques References
Support Vector Machines Shin et al. (2005); Chen (2011); Lu et al. (2014)
Decision Trees Olson et al. (2012); Tsai et al. (2014)
Artificial Neural Networks
Yang, Platt, and Platt (1999); Falavigna (2012);
Iturriaga and Sanz (2015); Azayite and Achchab (2016)
3.1. Support Vector Machines
The SVM classification algorithm is widely used in various fields, including corporate default
predictions. This algorithm uses a separating hyperplane to classify n observations, each of which
has p features. Each observation can be classified as having one of two statuses, defined as yi ∈ {−1,1},
where yi represents the status of the ith observation. The SVM algorithm needs to determine the
farthest separating hyperplane, and it allows some misclassifications to avoid the overfitting problem.
The optimal separating hyperplane can be represented by the following equation
max
β0,β1,···,βp,ε0,ε1,···,εn
M (8)
subject to
Pp
j=1
β2
j
= 1, yi

β0 +β1xi1 +··· +βpxip

≥ M(1−εi), εi ≥ 0,
Pn
i=1 εi ≤ C, where β0, β1, ···,
βp are hyperplane parameters and ε0, ε1, ···, εn are slack variables to allow for some misclassified
observations. M denotes the margin, which means the distance between the separating hyperplaneSustainability 2020, 12, 6325 6 of 11
and the observations. The tuning parameter, C, is greater than zero and determines the limits of the
classification errors [35].
Shin et al. [36] apply an SVM to corporate default prediction and show that the SVM performs
better than a back-propagation neural network model. Chen [37] compares several default prediction
models and claims that the SVM has high accuracy and performs well for short- and long-term default
predictions. Liang et al. [38] also show that the SVM yields the best performance when predicting
bankruptcy using financial ratios and corporate governance indicators. Lu et al. [39] extend the SVM
methodology using hybrid switching particle swarm optimization.
3.2. Decision Trees and Random Forests
The decision tree (DT) algorithm is a methodology for solving regression or classification problems
by charting decision rules in a tree structure. The DT algorithm divides a feature space, composed of a
combination of p explanatory variables X1, X2, ... , Xp, into J non-overlapping regions R1, R2, ... , RJ,
and it makes the same prediction for observations belonging to the same domain. The following
Gini index measures the quality of separation
G =
J X
j=1
p̂mj

1−p̂mj

(9)
where J is the number of states and p̂mj is the proportion of state j in region Rm [35]. The pruning
process, which establishes individual decision trees, is performed using the Gini index. The DT
algorithm has the advantage that the model is intuitive and easy to interpret, but it has the limitation
that the over-fitting problem is likely to occur in the process of dividing the feature space or producing
branches, and the prediction accuracy is reduced as a result.
The random forest (RF) algorithm is a machine learning algorithm that uses multiple DTs. The RF
algorithm chooses a pre-determined number of explanatory variables through randomization when it
creates a new DT. Generally, the number of variables selected is given by the square root of p, the total
number of explanatory variables. If we denote this number as k, then the RF algorithm generates
multiple DTs with k randomly selected explanatory variables. For a classification problem, this model’s
prediction is based on the most commonly predicted result across the DTs. Olson et al. [40] argue
that the DT algorithm is more understandable and accurate than other machine learning algorithms.
Tsai et al. [41] compare DT ensembles with SVMs and multilayer perception neural networks and claim
that DT ensembles perform the best. Zi˛ eba et al. [42] extend the DT algorithms by using the extreme
gradient boosting and synthetic features generation. Jardin [43] notably proposes a corporate default
prediction model with ensembles of Kohonen maps and argues that this approach is highly efficient.
3.3. Artificial Neural Networks
An artificial neural network is a machine learning algorithm devised according to the process by
which real human brains operate. This algorithm solves complex problems by mimicking the structure
of the brain and connecting artificial neurons using simple structures. Neurons, which are the basic
units making up the human brain and spinal cord, are responsible for transmitting the signals that
they receive to other connected neurons. Neurons transmit signals to other neurons only when the
intensity of the received signal is above a certain threshold.
Artificial neurons simulate the roles of these actual neurons through mathematical models.
Each artificial neuron receives multiple signals, x1, x2, ... , xj, composed of zeroes and ones, and it
calculates the weighted sum of the signals that it receives according to their weights, w1, w2, ... , wj.
Dependingonthemodel, signalsbelongingtotheset(−∞, ∞)ortheset(0, ∞)maybereceived. Asignal
is then transmitted to the next artificial neuron only when the weighted sum of the signals received is
above a certain intensity or threshold. The weights and thresholds of each neuron are determined bySustainability 2020, 12, 6325 7 of 11
the combination that leads to the best results based on past experience or data. An artificial neuron can
be expressed as follows:
yi = output =

     
     
0 if
P
j
wjxj ≤ threshold
1 if
P
j
wjxj > threshold.
(10)
An artificial neural network is a machine learning methodology that can solve complex problems
using a combination of simple artificial neurons. The network is composed of connections among
multiple layers of artificial neurons, and each layer is divided into an input layer and an output
layer, and a hidden layer between them. The process of training or optimizing the network involves
determining the weights and thresholds for each artificial neuron to obtain the best results and therefore
requires strong computational power.
Among the various possible structures of artificial neural networks, a model with several hidden
layers is called a deep neural network. The term “deep learning” refers to the use of such deep neural
networks for machine learning. This approach is intended to solve the problem of local minima that
arises in the existing artificial neural network methodology. It is characterized by continuously using
learnings from the data to improve the problem-solving ability of the network.
Default predictions using artificial neural networks are attempted before the 1990s. Yang et al. [44]
exploreseveralalgorithmsandshowthatFisherdiscriminantanalysisandprobabilisticneuralnetworks
have the best prediction performance. Recently, following the pioneering work of Hinton, Osindero,
and Teh [45], artificial neural networks are again emerging as a technique for corporate default
predictions. Falavigna [46] predicts the default risks of small Italian companies with insufficient
account information using an artificial neural network algorithm. López Iturriaga and Sanz [47]
estimate and visualize banks’ default risks by combining multilayer perceptrons and self-organizing
maps. AzayiteandAchchab[48]improveaneuralnetwork’sdefaultpredictionmodelbyincorporating
discriminantvariables. Gengetal.[49]showthattheneuralnetworkapproachhasabetterperformance
than other classifier algorithms. In addition, many studies have attempted to improve the prediction
performance by revising the neural network algorithm [50–52].
In recent years, deep learning has used a convolutional neural network (CNN) and recurrent
neural network (RNN) algorithms to solve the overfitting problems that arise in the learning process
and improve performance. CNN algorithms divide the information used for learning into multiple
domains and analyze the highly relevant domains using limited information. Thus, these algorithms
perform well in the field of image recognition and are widely used. The RNN algorithms are a way to
process and analyze data sequentially rather than independently analyzing the data used for learning,
and they are used to predict time series data and recognize the context of text data. Currently, deep
learning is used to understand the context of information and perform various tasks, such as pattern
recognition, natural language processing, and autonomous driving.
3.4. Other Studies
Because a corporate default is a rare event, the training datasets are typically highly imbalanced.
Quantitative models that use the full sample may not be appropriate because they may result in
biased predictions [53,54]. To overcome this problem, Zhou [55] compares several sampling techniques
(random oversampling with replication, the synthetic minority oversampling technique, random
undersampling, and undersampling based on clustering from the nearest neighbor) across several
machine learning algorithms (i.e., discriminant analysis, logistic regression, artificial neural networks,
and SVM). The results show that random undersampling and SVM perform well in most cases, but the
number of defaults in the training dataset can impact which methodology is most effective. Similarly,
Veganzones and Séverina [56] also show that an imbalanced dataset can disturb prediction performance
and that the SVM method is less sensitive than other methodologies. Kim et al. [57] suggest using
the optimization of cluster-based undersampling to solve the imbalance problem. Piri et al. [58]Sustainability 2020, 12, 6325 8 of 11
use a synthetic informative minority oversampling algorithm to enhance SVM performance with an
imbalanced dataset. Tian et al. [59] claim that different sampling techniques are required depending on
the purpose of the study. Song and Peng [60] suggest a multi-criteria decision making-based approach.
4. Discussion
In this study, we investigate previous studies on corporate default prediction. We also categorize
them from the perspectives of financial engineering and machine learning. The findings are as follows.
First, in much of the machine learning literature, corporate default predictions are considered as
classification problems. On the other hand, structural and hazard models in the field of financial
engineering understand and analyze corporate defaults as sequences. These approaches help us to
understand how the time-varying changes in the variables affect a company’s default risk. Second,
macroeconomic factors are rare or often neglected in corporate bankruptcy prediction studies using
machine learning methodologies. Of course, corporate defaults are mainly affected by the financial
conditions of individual companies. However, macroeconomic conditions also have an important
effect. Corporate default predictions using classification methodologies require the assumption that
individualeventsareindependent. However, ifmacroeconomicconditionschange, suchasthefinancial
crisis, corporate defaults are no longer independent events. Third, in many cases, the machine learning
approaches show superior corporate default forecasting performances to the financial engineering
approaches. However, machine learning methodologies do not provide a meaningful answer to the
cause of corporate default. While these forecasting can be useful for investors or credit rating agencies,
they do not help executives who want to improve their businesses.
Our findings also suggest some new tasks in the field of machine learning when predicting
corporate defaults. First, it is important to keep in mind that a corporate default prediction model is a
multi-period model in which the future is affected by past decisions. Nevertheless, many machine
learning models use one-period financial statements to avoid complexity. However, corporate defaults
are not generally caused by one excessive loss or huge debt, as inadequate decision making over
several periods often results in corporate default. Because the context is important for corporate default
predictions, multi-period models are more appropriate for explaining corporate defaults; the RNN
methodology can be a good example. In addition, it is necessary to use financial statement items from
multiple periods at the same time. Second, the stock price and the corporate value evaluated in the
stock market are important factors. However, the daily updated stock price is rarely used in machine
learning approaches because that data cycle is inconsistent with that of financial statements. Even when
the stock price is used, only the price at the time of the financial statements is incorporated. However,
many financial research studies confirm that a company’s stock price is an important explanatory
variable for predicting corporate default. Finally, a corporate default prediction model should be able
to suggest the cause of default. Predicting a corporate default is not simply a cats-or-dogs classification
problem. Corporate executives and government officials can obtain a large amount of information
from corporate default prediction models. However, if the model is a black box and cannot identify
the issues leading to a default prediction, the model’s usefulness is limited. Corporate default forecasts
should not stop with classifications but rather should be able to offer clues on how to avoid defaults.
This study has several limitations. We do not cover all topics related to corporate default
predictions. Explanatory variables that can affect corporate default are not considered. Variable
selection techniques that can improve forecasting performances are also not covered. While we
classified the related literature into statistical and machine learning approaches, we do not cover
the entirety of the literature but present representative studies that are important in each category.
Through this concentration, we derive meaningful findings and insights associated with this topic.
5. Conclusions
This review paper investigates the progress of research related to corporate default predictions
and examines the main research methodologies by classifying them as either statistical models orSustainability 2020, 12, 6325 9 of 11
machine learning algorithms. In addition, it forecasts the financial sector innovation brought about
by the development of machine learning. In doing so, this study aims to provide clues regarding the
future convergence of research in the management science and computer science fields and to lay the
foundation for expanding financial engineering methodologies to predict corporate default risks.
Our findings and suggestions for corporate default predictions are even more meaningful at
this particular time. Owing to a series of technological developments referred to as the Fourth
Industrial Revolution, the need to apply new methodologies to the field of financial engineering,
including corporate default forecasting, is emerging. In particular, the big data analysis methodologies
presented in this study suggest the need for enterprise-wide data governance to diagnose business
conditions and help investors make accurate decisions. Not just large companies but also small
and medium-sized enterprises now need to lay the foundation to easily and rapidly introduce
new technologies by accurately identifying the type, size, and frequency of management data and
continuously implementing quality management. The increase in the value of utilizing big data
associated with the development of machine learning methodologies is accompanied by the need to
strengthen the protection of personal information. Although de-identification measures are taken to
protect personal information in the process of using big data, personal information has been leaked,
in some cases through re-identification by combining big data with other information disclosed on the
Internet. It is necessary to actively utilize the latest technologies, such as homogeneous cryptography,
to reduce the risk of information leakage and perform big data analysis and processing without
disclosing personal information.
Corporate default predictions using machine learning demand attention because the calculation
process used to generate predictions may be a black box depending on the algorithm. Thus, although
such methodologies can be used to calculate corporate default risk, they face the limitation that they
cannot provide strategies for improving a company’s management to reduce default risk. Thus,
when performing corporate default forecasting, it is necessary to select an appropriate methodology
that can provide suitable information for the purpose of prediction, requiring a detailed understanding
of the appropriate utilization of each methodology.
Author Contributions: Proposal & original idea, H.K. and H.C.; conceptualization, H.K. and D.R.; modeling, H.K.
and D.R.; methodology, H.K. and H.C.; validation, D.R.; resources, D.R.; software, H.K.; literature review, H.K.,
H.C. and D.R.; economic & business implication, D.R.; writing—original draft preparation, H.K., H.C., and D.R.;
writing—review & editing, D.R.; discussion, H.K. and D.R.; project administration, D.R. All authors have read and
agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the
Korea government (MSIT; Ministry of Science and ICT) [No. 2019R1G1A1100196].
Acknowledgments: We are grateful for the valuable comments of three anonymous referees.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1. Beaver, W.H. Financial ratios as predictors of failure. J. Account. Res. 1966, 4, 71–111. [CrossRef]
2. Merton, R.C. On the pricing of corporate debt: The risk structure of interest rates. J. Financ. 1974, 29, 449–470.
3. Jessen, C.; Lando, D. Robustness of distance-to-default. J. Bank. Financ. 2015, 50, 493–505. [CrossRef]
4. Glover, B. The expected cost of default. J. Financ. Econ. 2016, 119, 284–299. [CrossRef]
5. Brogaard, J.; Li, D.; Xia, Y. Stock liquidity and default risk. J. Financ. Econ. 2017, 124, 486–502. [CrossRef]
6. Hillegeist, S.A.; Keating, E.K.; Cram, D.P.; Lundstedt, K.G. Assessing the probability of bankruptcy.
Rev. Account. Stud. 2004, 9, 5–34. [CrossRef]
7. Altman, E.I. Financial Ratios, Discriminant analysis and the prediction of corporate bankruptcy. J. Financ.
1968, 23, 589–609. [CrossRef]
8. Ohlson, J.A. Financial ratios and the probabilistic prediction of bankruptcy. J. Account. Res. 1980, 18, 109–131.
[CrossRef]Sustainability 2020, 12, 6325 10 of 11
9. Duffie, D.; Saita, L.; Wang, K. Multi-period corporate default prediction with stochastic covariates.
J. Financ. Econ. 2007, 83, 635–665. [CrossRef]
10. Alaka, H.A.; Oyedele, L.O.; Owolabi, H.A.; Kumar, V.; Ajayi, S.O.; Akinade, O.O.; Bilal, M. Systematic
review of bankruptcy prediction models: Towards a framework for tool selection. Expert Syst. Appl. 2018, 94,
164–184. [CrossRef]
11. Balcaen, S.; Ooghe, H. 35 years of studies on business failure: An overview of the classic statistical
methodologies and their related problems. Br. Account. Rev. 2006, 38, 63–93. [CrossRef]
12. Devi, S.S.; Radhika, Y. A survey on machine learning and statistical techniques in bankruptcy prediction.
Int. J. Mach. Learn. Comput. 2018, 8, 133–139. [CrossRef]
13. Ravi Kumar, P.; Ravi, V. Bankruptcy prediction in banks and firms via statistical and intelligent
techniques—A review. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 2007, 180, 1–28. [CrossRef]
14. Altman, E.I. Corporate Financial Distress and Bankruptcy: A Complete Guide to Predicting and Avoiding Distress
and Profiting from Bankruptcy, 2nd ed.; John Wiley and Sons Inc.: New York, NY, USA, 1993.
15. Mare, D.S.; Moreira, F.; Rossi, R. Nonstationary Z-score measures. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 2017, 260, 348–358.
[CrossRef]
16. Charitou, A.; Neophytou, E.; Charalambous, C. Predicting corporate failure: Empirical evidence for the UK.
Eur. Account. Rev. 2004, 13, 465–497. [CrossRef]
17. Zmijewski, M.E. Methodological issues related to the estimation of financial distress prediction models.
J. Account. Res. 1984, 22, 59–82. [CrossRef]
18. Foreman,R.D.AlogisticanalysisofbankruptcywithintheUSlocaltelecommunicationsindustry. J. Econ. Bus.
2003, 55, 135–166. [CrossRef]
19. Campbell, J.Y.; Hilscher, J.; Szilagyi, J. In search of distress risk. J. Financ. 2008, 63, 2899–2939. [CrossRef]
20. Aretz, K.; Florackis, C.; Kostakis, A. Do stock returns really decrease with default risk? New International
Evidence. Manag. Sci. 2018, 64, 3821–3842. [CrossRef]
21. Kukuk, M.; Rönnberg, M. Corporate credit default models: A mixed logit approach. Rev. Quant. Financ.
Account. 2013, 40, 467–483. [CrossRef]
22. Bonfim, D. Credit risk drivers: Evaluating the contribution of firm level information and of macroeconomic
dynamics. J. Bank. Financ. 2009, 33, 281–299. [CrossRef]
23. Shumway, T. Forecasting bankruptcy more accurately: A simple hazard model. J. Bus. 2001, 74, 101–124.
[CrossRef]
24. Cox, D.R. Regression models and life tables (with discussion). J. R. Stat. Soc. 1972, 34, 187–220.
25. Chava, S.; Jarrow, R.A. Bankruptcy prediction with industry effects. Rev. Financ. 2004, 8, 537–569. [CrossRef]
26. Nam, C.; Kim, T.; Park, N.; Lee, H. Bankruptcy prediction using a discrete-time duration model incorporating
temporal and macroeconomic dependencies. J. Forecast. 2008, 27, 493–506. [CrossRef]
27. Dakovic, R.; Czado, C.; Berg, D. Bankruptcy prediction in Norway: A comparison study. Appl. Econ. Lett.
2010, 17, 1739–1746. [CrossRef]
28. Duan,J.; Sun,J.; Wang,T.Multiperiodcorporatedefaultprediction—Aforwardintensityapproach. J. Econom.
2012, 170, 191–209. [CrossRef]
29. Traczynski, J. Firm default prediction: A Bayesian model-averaging approach. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 2017,
52, 1211–1245. [CrossRef]
30. Figlewski, S.; Frydman, H.; Liang, W. Modeling the effect of macroeconomic factors on corporate default and
credit rating transitions. Int. Rev. Econ. Financ. 2012, 21, 87–105. [CrossRef]
31. Tian, S.; Yu, Y.; Guo, H. Variable selection and corporate bankruptcy forecasts. J. Bank. Financ. 2015, 52,
89–100. [CrossRef]
32. Samuel, A.L. Some studies in machine learning using the game of checkers. IBM J. Res. Dev. 1959, 3, 210–229.
[CrossRef]
33. Mitchell, T. Machine Learning; McGraw Hill: New York, NY, USA, 1997.
34. Barboza, F.; Kimura, H.; Altman, E. Machine learning models and bankruptcy prediction. Expert Syst. Appl.
2017, 83, 405–417. [CrossRef]
35. James, G.; Witten, D.; Hastie, T.; Tibshirani, R. An Introduction to Statistical Learning, 112; Springer: New York,
NY, USA, 2013.
36. Shin, K.S.; Lee, T.S.; Kim, H.J. An application of support vector machines in bankruptcy prediction model.
Expert Syst. Appl. 2005, 28, 127–135. [CrossRef]Sustainability 2020, 12, 6325 11 of 11
37. Chen, M.Y. Bankruptcy prediction in firms with statistical and intelligent techniques and a comparison of
evolutionary computation approaches. Comput. Math. Appl. 2011, 62, 4514–4524. [CrossRef]
38. Liang, D.; Lu, C.C.; Tsai, C.F.; Shih, G.A. Financial ratios and corporate governance indicators in bankruptcy
prediction: A comprehensive study. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 2016, 252, 561–572. [CrossRef]
39. Lu, Y.; Zhu, J.; Zhang, N.; Shao, Q. A hybrid switching PSO algorithm and support vector machines for
bankruptcy prediction. In Proceedings of the 2014 International Conference on Mechatronics and Control,
Jinzhou, China, 3–5 July 2014; pp. 1329–1333.
40. Olson, D.L.; Delen, D.; Meng, Y. Comparative analysis of data mining methods for bankruptcy prediction.
Decis. Support Syst. 2012, 52, 464–473. [CrossRef]
41. Tsai, C.F.; Hsu, Y.F.; Yen, D.C. A comparative study of classifier ensembles for bankruptcy prediction.
Appl. Soft Comput. 2014, 24, 977–984. [CrossRef]
42. Zi˛ eba, M.; Tomczak, S.K.; Tomczak, J.M. Ensemble boosted trees with synthetic features generation in
application to bankruptcy prediction. Expert Syst. Appl. 2016, 58, 93–101. [CrossRef]
43. Du Jardin, P. Failure pattern-based ensembles applied to bankruptcy forecasting. Decis. Support Syst. 2018,
107, 64–77. [CrossRef]
44. Yang, Z.; Platt, M.B.; Platt, H.D. Probabilistic neural networks in bankruptcy prediction. J. Bus. Res. 1999, 44,
67–74. [CrossRef]
45. Hinton, G.E.; Osindero, S.; Teh, Y.-W. A fast learning algorithm for deep belief nets. Neural Comput. 2006, 18,
1527–1554. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
46. Falavigna, G. Financial ratings with scarce information: A neural network approach. Expert Syst. Appl. 2012,
39, 1784–1792. [CrossRef]
47. López Iturriaga, F.J.; Sanz, I.P. Bankruptcy visualization and prediction using neural networks: A study of
US commercial banks. Expert Syst. Appl. 2015, 42, 2857–2869. [CrossRef]
48. Azayite, F.Z.; Achchab, S. Hybrid discriminant neural networks for bankruptcy prediction and risk scoring.
Procedia Comput. Sci. 2016, 83, 670–674. [CrossRef]
49. Geng, R.; Bose, I.; Chen, X. Prediction of financial distress: An empirical study of listed Chinese companies
using data mining. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 2015, 241, 236–247. [CrossRef]
50. Chen, J.-H. Developing SFNN models to predict financial distress of construction companies.
Expert Syst. Appl. 2012, 39, 823–827. [CrossRef]
51. Chen, H.-J.; Huang, S.Y.; Lin, C.-S. Alternative diagnosis of corporate bankruptcy: A neuro fuzzy approach.
Expert Syst. Appl. 2009, 36, 7710–7720. [CrossRef]
52. Chen,N.; Ribeiro,B.; Vieira,A.S.; Duartea,J.; Neves,J.C.Ageneticalgorithm-basedapproachtocost-sensitive
bankruptcy prediction. Expert Syst. Appl. 2011, 38, 12939–12945. [CrossRef]
53. Kotsiantis, S.; Kanellopoulos, D.; Pintelas, P. Handling imbalanced datasets: A review. GESTS Int. Trans.
Comput. Sci. Eng. 2006, 30, 25–36.
54. Lane, P.C.R.; Clarke, D.; Hender, P. On developing robust models for favourability analysis: Model choice,
feature sets and imbalanced data. Decis. Support Syst. 2012, 53, 712–718. [CrossRef]
55. Zhou, L. Performance of corporate bankruptcy prediction models on imbalanced dataset: The effect of
sampling methods. Knowl. Based Syst. 2013, 41, 16–25. [CrossRef]
56. Veganzones, D.; Séverina, E. An investigation of bankruptcy prediction in imbalanced datasets.
Decis. Support Syst. 2018, 112, 111–124. [CrossRef]
57. Kim, H.-J.; Jo, N.-O.; Shin, K.-S. Optimization of cluster-based evolutionary undersampling for the artificial
neural networks in corporate bankruptcy prediction. Expert Syst. Appl. 2016, 59, 226–234. [CrossRef]
58. Piri, S.; Delen, D.; Liu, T. A synthetic informative minority over-sampling (SIMO) algorithm leveraging support
vector machine to enhance learning from imbalanced datasets. Decis. Support Syst. 2018, 106, 15–29. [CrossRef]
59. Tian, S.; Yu, Y.; Zhou, M. Data sample selection issues for bankruptcy prediction. Risk Hazards Crisis Pub.
Policy 2015, 6, 91–116. [CrossRef]
60. Song, Y.; Peng, Y. A MCDM-based evaluation approach for imbalanced classification methods in financial
risk prediction. IEEE Access 2019, 7, 84897–84906. [CrossRef]
© 2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).