Measuring the model risk‑adjusted
performance of machine learning algorithms
in credit default prediction
Andrés Alonso Robisco and José Manuel Carbó Martínez*
Introduction
While machine learning (ML) algorithms seem to outperform traditional quantitative
models in terms of predictive capabilities, especially from the supervisors’ perspective,
they also pose new risks. Some of them, as cited in the supervisory and regulatory lit-
erature (see European Banking Authority 2017a; 2020; Dupont et al. 2020), are associ-
ated with interpretability, biases or discrimination, prediction stability, governance or
changes in the technological risk profile due to exposure to cyber risk, and dependence
on external providers of technological infrastructure. Supervisors face the challenge of
Abstract
Implementing new machine learning (ML) algorithms for credit default prediction is
associated with better predictive performance; however, it also generates new model
risks, particularly concerning the supervisory validation process. Recent industry sur-
veys often mention that uncertainty about how supervisors might assess these risks
could be a barrier to innovation. In this study, we propose a new framework to quan-
tify model risk-adjustments to compare the performance of several ML methods.To
address this challenge, we first harness the internal ratings-based approach to identify
up to 13 risk components that we classify into 3 main categories—statistics, technol-
ogy, and market conduct. Second, to evaluate the importance of each risk category,
we collect a series of regulatory documents related to three potential use cases—regu-
latory capital, credit scoring, or provisioning—and we compute the weight of each
category according to the intensity of their mentions, using natural language process-
ing and a risk terminology based on expert knowledge. Finally, we test our framework
using popular ML models in credit risk, and a publicly available database, to quantify
some proxies of a subset of risk factors that we deem representative.We measure the
statistical risk according to the number of hyperparameters and the stability of the pre-
dictions.The technological risk is assessed through the transparency of the algorithm
and the latency of the ML training method, while the market conduct risk is quantified
by the time it takes to run a post hoc technique (SHapley Additive exPlanations) to
interpret the output.
Keywords: Artificial intelligence, Machine learning, Credit risk, Interpretability, Bias,
Internal ratings based model, IRB model, Natural language processing, NLP
OpenAccess
©TheAuthor(s)2022.OpenAccessThisarticleislicensedunderaCreativeCommonsAttribution4.0InternationalLicense,whichpermits
use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original
author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made.The images or other third
partymaterialinthisarticleareincludedinthearticle’sCreativeCommonslicence,unlessindicatedotherwiseinacreditlinetothemate-
rial.Ifmaterialisnotincludedinthearticle’sCreativeCommonslicenceandyourintendeduseisnotpermittedbystatutoryregulationor
exceedsthepermitteduse,youwillneedtoobtainpermissiondirectlyfromthecopyrightholder.Toviewacopyofthislicence,visithttp://​
creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/.
RESEARCH
Alonso Robisco and Carbó Martínez ﻿
FinancialInnovation (2022)8:70
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40854-022-00366-1
Financial Innovation
*Correspondence:
jose.carbo@bde.es
Banco de España, Calle de Alcalá,
48, 28014 Madrid, SpainPage 2 of 35 Alonso Robisco and Carbó Martínez ﻿FinancialInnovation (2022)8:70
allowing financial institutions and clients to maximize the opportunities stemming from
technological progress and financial innovation, while observing the principles of tech-
nological neutrality, regulatory compliance, and consumer protection.
According to the International Institute of Finance (2019b), given the steep learning
curve of ML as a technology, supervisors struggle to keep up with its fast-moving pace
(Wall 2018). Therefore, it is appropriate to continue refining their knowledge about how
financial institutions use ML to monitor new model risks as they arise and understand
how they might be mitigated.
To overcome this challenge, we suggest a framework that allows the establishment of
a bridge between the qualitative list of risk factors usually associated with ML and how
to obtain a risk score for each model. As stated in Jung et al. (2019), regulation is not
seen as an unjustified barrier, but some firms stress the need for additional guidance on
how to interpret it. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to evaluate ML
algorithms used for credit default prediction via their model risk-adjusted performance.
To build our framework, we must first identify the key components of model risk from
the supervisor’s perspective. For this purpose, we study the compatibility of ML tech-
niques with the validation process of internal ratings-based (IRB) models to calculate
the minimum regulatory capital requirements. Although the IRB approach is restricted
to capital requirements, it has an impact beyond this use, considering that the risk com-
ponents estimated using IRB models (e.g., probability of default) must be aligned with
those used internally for any other purpose. We identify 13 components that we refer to
as risk factors and classify them into 3 different risk categories, namely, statistics, tech-
nology, and market conduct issues. Of these risk factors, we focus on a subset of them
to represent the overall risk of the model. For instance, in our exercise, in the statistics
category, the risk score is computed only on the basis of the stability of the predictions,
measured as the standard deviation of the predictions of the models when using differ-
ent sample sizes, as well as the number of nonzero hyperparameters. For the technology
category, the score depends on the transparency of the algorithm and the latency (num-
ber of seconds) of the training as a proxy for the carbon footprint (Strubell et al. 2019).
For the market conduct category, the score depends on the latency (number of seconds)
of the computation of the SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) for the interpretability
of the results. The final risk associated with a particular ML model will depend on the
final score of each risk category weighted by the importance or intensity of the regula-
tory requirements of each category, subject to each use case of the model (capital, credit
scoring, or provisioning). To compute these weights, we propose a novel approach based
on natural language processing (NLP). First, we collect a series of regulatory texts for
each use case, and we calculate the importance of each risk category according to the
intensity of mentions in the documents, using our own risk terminology based on expert
knowledge, representative of the universe of each risk category. For instance, we find
that statistical risks are more important for regulatory capital, while technology and
market conduct risks are more important for credit scoring.
We test our framework with five of the most used ML models in the credit risk litera-
ture: penalized logistic regression using least absolute shrinkage and selection operator
(LASSO), decision tree (CART), random forest, Extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost),
and deep learning. Using a public database available on Kaggle.com for credit defaultPage 3 of 35 Alonso Robisco and Carbó Martínez ﻿FinancialInnovation (2022)8:70
prediction, we compute the potential model risks from validating these models and their
potential predictive performance. We find that, for this particular database, XGBoost
and random forest are the most efficient risk-adjusted models.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. in “Literature review” section,
we review the literature on the use of ML for credit default prediction. In “Identifying
the risks: compatibility of ML with the IRB validation process” section, we identify the
potential limitations of using ML in credit default prediction by reviewing the IRB sys-
tem under the Basel Accords. In “Quantifying the model risk” section, we demonstrate
how our framework measures the potential model risks and benefits from the use of ML
by credit institutions from the supervisor’s perspective. In “An empirical example” sec-
tion, we show an empirical example of our framework, and the conclusion is presented
in “Conclusion” section.
Literature review
The emerging use of ML in financial systems is transforming society and industry.
From hedge funds and commercial banks to contemporary financial technology ser-
vice providers (Lynn et al. 2019; Kou et al. 2021b), many financial firms today are heav-
ily investing in the acquisition of data science and ML expertise (Wall 2018; Institute of
International Finance [IIF] 2019a).
Financial risk analysis is an area where ML is mainly applied by financial intermedi-
aries (see, e.g., Jung et al. 2019 for a survey on UK financial services; Kou et al. (2014)
regarding the evaluation of clustering algorithms using credit risk datasets; or Li et al.
2021 for fraud detection). However, within this field, the application with the greatest
potential for this technology is credit default prediction (Königstorfer and Thalmann
2020). There is an extensive review of the literature on the predictive gains of ML on
this topic. We collect a series of papers that use ML algorithms to predict the impair-
ment of loans, mortgages, retail exposures, corporate loans, or a mixture thereof. In all
the studies analyzed, the target variable to predict is the probability of default (PD). To
robustly assess the results obtained from different models and samples, we focus on the
classification power using the area under the curve—receiver operating characteristic
(AUC-ROC) metric, out-of-sample.1
The ROC curve shows the relationship between the
true and false positive rates for all possible classification thresholds. The area below the
AUC-ROC curve measures the predictive power of the classifier. Figure 1 presents all the
papers included in our literature review in an orderly manner. On the horizontal axis, we
divide the papers based on the ML technique used and the a priori algorithmic com-
plexity.2
First, we distinguish between parametric and nonparametric models. Among
the nonparametric models, we consider that deep learning models are more complex
than tree-based models because the number of parameters to estimate is higher and
their interpretability requires post hoc techniques. Finally, we consider reinforcement
1
In Butaru et al. (2016) predictive power is measured with the Recall, which represents the percentage of defaulted
loans correctly predicted as such. In the case of Cheng and Xiang (2017), predictive power is measured by means of the
Kolmogorov–Smirnov statistic, a metric similar to AUC-ROC that measures the degree of separation between the dis-
tributions of positives (default) and negatives (non-default).
2
Similarly, in Gu et al. (2020) the authors estimate the time varying complexity within each ML model by reporting the
number of selected components in each model, like for instance, the number of features selected to have nonzero coef-
ficients for Lasso regressions; or the average tree depth for Random forest.Page 4 of 35 Alonso Robisco and Carbó Martínez ﻿FinancialInnovation (2022)8:70
learning and convolutional nets as the most complex models because the former
requires a complicated state/action/reward architecture, while the latter entails a time
dimension and thus an extra layer of complexity with respect to deep neural networks.3
On the vertical axis, we measure the gain in predictive power in terms of AUC-ROC
relative to the discriminatory power obtained using a logit model on the same sample.4
While the sample sizes and the nature of the underlying exposures and ML models dif-
fer between studies, they all find that more advanced ML techniques (e.g., random for-
est and deep learning) give better predictions than traditional statistical models. The
predictive gains are very heterogeneous, reaching up to 20%, and do not behave mono-
tonically as we advance toward more algorithmically complex models. We contribute to
this literature by providing, in “An empirical example” section, our own estimates of the
predictive gains from the use of ML in our empirical example. To the best of our knowl-
edge, we adjust the statistical performance for the first time by measuring the model risk
embedded in each algorithm. Our results are consistent with the main findings in the
literature. We find gross gains of up to 5% in the AUC-ROC metric from the use of ML,
while deep learning models do not necessarily outperform tree-based models, such as
random forest or XGBoost, which also turn out to be the most efficient in risk-adjusted
terms. The framework we propose in this study aims to measure the performance and
risks (i.e., to measure risk-adjusted performance) of different ML models depending on
the use case. We do not aim to indicate how to overcome or mitigate their intrinsic risk
factors. We include a table in the Appendix Table 13, that summarizes all the papers
based on the ML model that they use.
Dimensionalityreducon(PCA) and
regularisaon(LASSO, Ridge, etc).
Trees, Random Forest and
XGBoost
Deep Neural Networks Reinforcement Learning, Convoluonal
Neural Networks, andEnsemble Methods
Algorithmic complexity
Jones etal
(2015a)
Petropoulos etal
(2018a)
Petropoulos
etal (2018b)
Sigrist & Hirnschall (2019)
Kvamme etal
(2018)
Sirigniano et al (2019a)
Sirigniano et al
(2019b)
Jones etal (2015b)
Albanesi y
Vamossy (2019)
Moscatelli et al (2019)
Turiel (2019)
Babaev etal (2019)
Cheng & Xiang
(2017a)
Cheng & Xiang
(2017b)
Cheng & Xiang (2017c)
Logit
Butaru etal
(2016)
Jones etal (2015c)
Jones etal (2015d)
Guegan Hassani (2018a) Guegan Hassani (2018b)
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
20%
Gains in predicon (AUC-ROC vs Logit)
Fig. 1 The dilemma between prediction gains and algorithmic complexity
3
Metrics like the VC dimension (see Vapnik–Chervonenkis 2015) could be used to account for the capacity of the algo-
rithms, when a particular architecture is taken into account. However, for comparison reasons we solely aimed to illus-
trate the changes in the “structural” algorithmic complexity, in terms of ability to adapt to non-linear, highly dimensional
problems. Therefore, changes to this rank could be considered depending on the set of parameters and hyper-parame-
ters considered in each model.
4
In Butaru et al. (2016) predictive power is measured with the Recall, which represents the percentage of defaulted
loans correctly predicted as such. In the case of Cheng and Xiang (2017), predictive power is measured by means of the
Kolmogorov–Smirnov statistic, a metric similar to AUC-ROC that measures the degree of separation between the dis-
tributions of positives (default) and negatives (non-default).Page 5 of 35 Alonso Robisco and Carbó Martínez ﻿FinancialInnovation (2022)8:70
On the one hand, in the literature on the performance of ML in credit default predic-
tion, there are other potential gains mentioned from the use of this technology. These
include positive spillover, such as increasing the financial inclusion of underserved pop-
ulation segments owing to the possibility of using ML together with massive amounts of
information, including alternative data, such as the digital footprint of prospective cli-
ents, thereby allowing new individuals with little to no financial history to access new
credit (Bartlett et al. 2022; Barruetabeña 2020; Dobbie et al. 2021; Huang et al. 2020; Kou
et al. 2021a; Fuster et al. 2022).
On the other hand, the literature on the potential model risk from the use of ML for
credit scoring is more limited. Several studies have reported negative spillovers if credit
scoring models are over-reliant on digital data, which could discriminate against other
individuals that lack or decide not to share this sort of personal data (Bazarbash 2019;
Jagtiani and Lemieux 2019). Little attention has been paid to the risks and costs that the
use of ML by institutions may pose to supervisors. There are studies in the literature that
try to explain which factors matter for the governance of ML algorithms on a qualitative
basis, such as Dupont et al. (2020) and IIF (2020). However, these articles mention risk
factors out of order and do not comprehensively discuss how the risk associated with
each model should be classified or measured. Our contribution is that we endeavor to
identify the factors that may constitute a component of model risk when validating or
evaluating ML models, thus presenting a consistent approach to measure the resulting
risk-adjusted performance.
Finally, because we measure how the interpretations of ML model differ, our work
is also related to the literature on explainable ML. Notwithstanding that ML models
are sometimes considered black box models, a growing and recent field that attempts
to elucidate their explanations exists. One of the main approaches toward interpreting
an ML model consists of applying post hoc evaluation techniques (or model-agnostic
techniques) that explain which features are more relevant to the prediction of a par-
ticular model. If we are interested in how they influence a particular prediction, these
techniques provide local explainability. Among local explainability techniques, the most
popular is probably LIME, as propounded by Ribeiro et al. (2016). However, if we are
interested in the relevance of the features for all predictions on a dataset, we use global
interpretability techniques. The most important ones are permutation feature impor-
tance (Breiman 2001; Fisher et al. 2019) and SHAP (Lundberg and Lee 2017; Lundberg
et al. 2020).5
These two global techniques are based on measuring how the prediction
(SHAP) or accuracy (permutation feature importance) of an ML model changes when
we permute the values of the input features. The manner in which we permute the val-
ues of the features differs depending on the technique used. There is an ongoing debate
on the efficacy of these techniques as ML interpretation tools. On the one hand, there
are papers that argue that the level of explanation obtained by SHAP could be compa-
rable to that of parametric models such as LASSO and logit (Ariza-Garzón et al. 2020).
Furthermore, Albanesi and Vamossy (2019) demonstrates the effectiveness of SHAP for
explaining the outcome of ML algorithms in a credit scoring context. Another example
5
Shap can be used as well as local interpretability technique.Page 6 of 35 Alonso Robisco and Carbó Martínez ﻿FinancialInnovation (2022)8:70
is Moscato et al. (2021), who apply a wide range of interpretability techniques (LIME,
Anchors, SHAP, BEEF, and LORE) to random forest and multilayer perceptron models
for loan default prediction. They find that LORE has better results, while SHAP is more
stable than LIME. On the other hand, other studies affirm that the explanation of the
outcome of an ML model by SHAP could be biased or seriously affected by the correla-
tions of the features of the dataset (Mittelstadt et al. 2019; Barr et al. 2020). Arguably,
SHAP is still an evolving method, and many authors are making extensions based on this
theory (Frye et al. 2019; Heskes et al. 2020; Lundberg et al. 2020).
Identifying the risks: compatibility of ML with the IRB validation process
Our goal is to establish a methodology that allows supervisors to quantify the model
risk-adjustment of any given ML method. To do this, we first need to identify and clas-
sify all the factors that might constitute a source of model risk from the supervisors’ per-
spective. We do so by harnessing the validation process of IRB systems. Although the
IRB approach is restricted to the calculation of minimum capital requirements, it has an
impact beyond this use, as the risk components estimated using IRB models (e.g., PD)
must be aligned with those used internally for any other purpose.6
We first identify up
to 13 factors that could represent risk from the supervisor’s perspective. Thereafter, we
classify them into three different categories, namely, statistics, technology, and market
conduct.
Credit institutions are responsible for evaluating the performance of IRB systems.
However, there are explicit requirements in the Basel Accords vis-à-vis how this pro-
cess should be undertaken (Heitfield 2005). In this regard, the supervisor’s tasks include
ensuring that the models are correctly validated. When using the foundation IRB
approach, as a general rule, institutions will only have to estimate the PD, while the
remaining risk components will be predetermined by the regulation.7
Once the design
of the statistical model has been approved and the estimation is aligned with the super-
visor’s requirements, the result will be entered into an economic model for computing
regulatory capital. This part of the validation is primarily quantitative. In parallel, IRB
systems also involve certain issues, such as data privacy and quality, internal reporting,
governance, and how to solve problems while operating in a business-as-usual mode.
The last part of the validation is mostly qualitative, and it is more dependent on the
supervisor’s expertise, skills, and preferences. The importance of both issues depends on
the purpose of the model (e.g., credit scoring, pricing, or regulatory capital calculation).8
In Fig. 2, we list the key risk factors usually mentioned in the regulatory literature,
placing them within the IRB validation process and discovering a total of 13 factors.
6
Article CRE36.60 of the Basel general framework requires that models under the IRB approach be used in the manage-
ment of the institution’s business, requiring alignment between IRB systems and the risk factors used internally in any
other field, such as credit scoring, internal risk management or corporate governance.
7
All the remaining risk factors (e.g.: loss given default or maturity adjustments and credit conversion factors) are
defined in the regulation, depending on the type of underlying credit exposure.
8
In “Quantifying the model risk” section we will quantify both the systemic or common risk factors that matter to the
supervisor given any purpose of the predictive model and the idiosyncratic or local factors that refer specifically to each
use involving credit default prediction.Page 7 of 35 Alonso Robisco and Carbó Martínez ﻿FinancialInnovation (2022)8:70
The risk factors: a tale of statistics, technology, and market conduct
Having identified these risk factors, we proceed to map them into the scheme of the vali-
dation process of IRB systems, as shown in Fig. 2.
Statistics
Statistical model risk may be categorized into different components. Assuming that
models rely on usual econometric methods, it allows us to distinguish between estima-
tion risk, associated with the inaccurate estimation of parameters,9
and misspecification
risk. In the banking supervision field, Kerkhof et al. (2010) propose an additional com-
ponent of statistical model risk, in particular, identification risk that arises when obser-
vationally indistinguishable models have different consequences for capital reserves.
To account for this uncertainty, the European Banking Authority (2013) states that
“Institutions should include the impact of valuation model risk when assessing the
prudent value of its balance sheet. [..] Where possible an institution should quantify
model risk by comparing the valuations produced from the full spectrum of modelling
and calibration approaches.” In this sense, the model risk concept that is considered
in this study includes a holistic approach to all the above-mentioned components that
affect the uncertainty of pointwise estimations, as is usually carried out following the
IRB approach. Specifically, there are a series of factors that could affect the model’s
estimation and are commonly associated with the use of ML;10
these include the pres-
ence of hyperparameters, the need to preprocess the input data (feature engineering),
or the complexity of performing back testing when dynamic calibration is required (for
instance, in reinforcement learning models), as it would be infeasible to “freeze” the
Biases
Internalvalidationbythe
credit institution
Supervisory
review
Rating
process
Rating
system
PD
Calibration
Classification
LGD Other
Riskfactors Estimates
Backtesting Benchmarking
Technological
infrastructure
Monitoring&
governance
Internal uses Data quality
1º
2º
Stability
Dynamic
Calibration
Feature
engineering
Interpretability
Third-party
providers
depedencies
Cyber-attacks
Auditability
Transparency Privacy
Carbonfootprint
Economicmodel
Hyper-parameters
Over-fitting
Rating
process
Rating
system
PD
Classification
LGD Other
Risk factors Estimates
Technological
infrastructure
Monitoring&
governance
Internaluses Dataquality
Calibration Backtesting Benchmarking
Economicmodel
Internalvalidationbythe
credit institution
Supervisory
review
Fig. 2 Validation of IRB systems and its compatibility with ML
9
See Tarashev (2010) for an application of parameter uncertainty on measuring portfolio credit risk correctly, or Farkas
et al. (2020) who derive confidence intervals for the metric Value-at-Risk and evaluate its impact on capital requirements
for market risk.
10
See Babel et al. (2019).Page 8 of 35 Alonso Robisco and Carbó Martínez ﻿FinancialInnovation (2022)8:70
model and evaluate its performance outside the sample, as proposed in Basel.11
Sim-
ilarly, the concern about overfitting is always present in the use of ML because of its
high flexibility as well as the stability of the classifications (European Banking Author-
ity 2017a) aiming to prevent the procyclicality of the estimates and following the pos-
sible migrations observed between credit ratings, such that the robustness of the model
throughout an economic cycle can be demonstrated.
Technology
One of the areas associated with algorithmic complexity is the technological require-
ments necessary for its implementation and maintenance in production while operat-
ing normally; this is usually associated with cyber technology and cloud computing.
Although cyber losses constitute a small fraction of total operational losses, they account
for a significant share of the total operational value-at-risk (Aldasaro et al. 2020). Addi-
tionally, higher algorithmic complexity reduces transparency, which increases the cost of
financial institutions due to the need to engage external auditors for regulatory compli-
ance (Masciandaro et al. 2020).
One variable to measure the technological burden of ML could be the time required
for the computation of the model and its consequent environmental impact, that is,
the carbon footprint derived from its electricity consumption (see Alonso and Mar-
qués 2019). Although recent industry research, such as CDP (2020), shows that indirect
financed emissions (scope 3) are considered to outweigh both directly produced emis-
sions (scope 1) and indirect consumption-related emissions (scope 2), the truth is that,
currently, the vast majority of reported emissions in the financial industry remains only
in scopes 1 and 2 (see Moreno and Caminero 2020 for a breakdown of climate-related
disclosures by significant Spanish financial institutions). Therefore, when credit under-
writing represents a significant share of banks’ business models, keeping this technology
under environmental evaluation may represent a key element of the current (carbon)
net-zero commitments by these institutions.
Another factor that should be considered is the increasing dependence on services
provided by third-party providers, such as cloud computing, or those related to fast data
processing through the use of GPUs or TPUs (Financial Stability Board 2019)12
and the
potential change in the exposure to cyber risk. The integration of these services with leg-
acy technology is one of the main challenges for institutions, and it is presented as one of
the most important obstacles when putting ML models into production (see IIF 2019a).
Notably, some institutions are exploring the use of cloud computing providers to avoid
12
The graphics processing unit (GPU) has an advantage over the central processing unit (CPU) when training complex
ML models because of its distinct architecture. While the CPU is made up of a small number of complex cores that work
sequentially, the GPU is made up of many simple, small cores that are designed to work on multiple tasks simultane-
ously. The ability to perform multiple calculations in tandem makes the GPU a very efficient tool for using ML. Likewise,
the Tensor Processing Unit (TPU) is an application-specific integrated circuit, AI accelerator, developed by Google spe-
cifically for machine learning.
11
In the calculation of capital add-on for market risk, errors are counted on a daily basis, and depending on whether
they amount to one threshold or another, they are counted as green, yellow, or red. This data is abundant and can be
used to improve the models. Furthermore, in credit risk, the scarcity of defaults means that a time series usually contains
only up to ten annual data points, such that the confidence in the credit risk estimates is significantly lower than in the
market risk estimates. To correct this weakness, there is the possibility of counting the errors based on the rating migra-
tions observed for the debtors, since there will be a higher frequency of observed data. In any case, if a bias is identified
in the quantification of risk, it must always be adjusted, beyond the estimation’s own margin of error, by establishing a
margin of conservatism.Page 9 of 35 Alonso Robisco and Carbó Martínez ﻿FinancialInnovation (2022)8:70
such challenges and utilize new data sources, which are particularly relevant to financial
authorities because of their potential to impact data privacy.13
Market conduct
Similarly, data quality and, in particular, all privacy-related matters are additional aspects
to be considered by institutions when applying ML. According to the EBA (2020), one of
ML’s main limitations concerns data quality. Institutions use their structured data as the
main sources of information in predictive models, prioritizing compliance with privacy
regulations and the availability of highly reliable data. It follows that, in the context of
lending, there is no widespread use of alternative data sources (e.g., information from
social networks), while advanced data analytics are used to some extent. To consider all
these issues, the system of governance and monitoring of ML models acquires particu-
lar relevance, including some aspects such as transparency in the programming of algo-
rithms as well as the auditability of models and their use by different users within the
institutions, from the management team to the analysts (see Babel et al. 2019).
Finally, there are two areas, interpretability and control of biases, whose importance
transcends statistical or technological evaluation, thereby influencing legal and ethical
considerations with repercussions for clients and consumer protection. For instance, the
proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and the Council laying down har-
monized rules on artificial intelligence (European Commission 2021) explicitly classifies
credit scoring as a “high risk” activity due to its potential economic impact on people’s
lives. Therefore, from a supervisory perspective, these aspects mostly belong to the field
of market conduct. Perhaps, these two additional factors represent ML’s most important
new model risks with respect to traditional statistical models. Unlike traditional statisti-
cal models, most ML models are not inherently interpretable; therefore, we require post
hoc interpretation techniques to evaluate their outcomes.14
However, these interpreta-
tion techniques can lead to misleading conclusions (Rudin 2019), and they have limita-
tions regarding controlling for biases (Slack et al. 2020).
In summary, we use the IRB system to place the list of factors that may constitute a
source of model risk within its validation process. In Table 1 we group these factors into
three categories: (1) statistics, (2) technology, and (3) market conduct.
Purpose of the model
Finally, we must reiterate the circumstance that any model risk-adjustment process
should depend on, which is the actual use of the algorithm. We consider three possi-
ble use cases: credit scoring and monitoring, regulatory capital, and provisioning (IIF
2019a).15
For instance, it might be argued that credit institutions usually enjoy greater
flexibility when using statistical models for provisioning rather than in other fields,
such as regulatory capital, although they must still comply with the regulations and
13
See European Banking Authority (2017c).
14
We will introduce in “Quantifying the model risk” section some of the most popular of post hoc explanations tech-
niques. For a complete review of post hoc explanations of machine learning models, see Molnar (2019).
15
To this end, we disregard the potential use of ML techniques to build a master model by the supervisor to assist with
the benchmarking task.Page 10 of 35 Alonso Robisco and Carbó Martínez ﻿FinancialInnovation (2022)8:70
principles of prudence and fair representation.16
In fact, provisions could be envisaged
as an accounting concept governed by the International Accounting Standard Board.17
Specifically, IFRS 9.B5.5.42 requires “the estimate of expected credit losses from credit
exposures to reflect an unbiased and probability-weighted amount that is determined by
evaluating a range of possible outcomes […] this may not need to be a complex analysis.”
Similarly, it has been established that the information used to compute provisions can
only be qualitative, although the use of statistical models or rating systems will be occa-
sionally required to incorporate quantitative information (IFRS 9. B 5.5.18). However,
granting new loans or credit scoring is a field wherein the use of ML could have a greater
impact because of the availability of massive amounts of data that could increase the
value provided by more flexible and scalable models (see IIF 2019b). Nonetheless, pre-
cisely because of its importance, credit scoring is a field that is subject to special regula-
tion in particular market conduct rules,18
as is also the case with regulatory capital (see
IIF 2019a).
Table 1 Components of ML model risk
Model risk components
Statistics
Stability
Hyper-parameters
Over-fitting
Dynamic calibration
Feature engineering
Technology
Transparency
Carbon-footprint
Third-party providers
Cyber-risk
Market conduct
Privacy
Auditability
Interpretability
Biases
16
In “An empirical example” section we run an empirical exercise to assess precisely this.
17
See Appendix 9 from Circular 04/2017, November 27th, Banco de España.
18
The EBA (2019b) guidelines on loan origination and monitoring determines that when technological innovation is
used to grant credit, institutions must, inter alia, (1) manage the risks derived from the use of this technology; (2) evalu-
ate the potential bias that can be introduced into the decision-making process; (3) be able to explain the result ensuring
their robustness, traceability, auditability and resilience; (4) document the correct use of the tool; and (5) ensure that the
entire management team and analysts understand how it works. Based on the principle of proportionality, the national
competent authorities will require documentation on the credit scoring models, and their level of understanding within
the entity, both by managers and employees, as well as the technical capacity for their maintenance. Likewise, given the
relevance of the use of this technology in the Fintech sector, the ECB (2018) incorporates the evaluation of structural
aspects of the governance of the credit granting process, as well as the credit evaluation methodologies and the manage-
ment of the data. In fact, the use of AI (including ML) for credit scoring is one of the practical cases recently discussed
by the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) with the Fintech industry in one of its latest dialogues (May 2019).Page 11 of 35 Alonso Robisco and Carbó Martínez ﻿FinancialInnovation (2022)8:70
Quantifying the model risk
In this section, we propose a methodology to measure the perceived model risk from a
supervisory standpoint when validating any ML-based system, which depends on the
intrinsic characteristics of the ML algorithm and on the model’s intended use. The meth-
odology consists of two phases. First, we discuss the assignment of a score to a given ML
model for each of the three risk categories. Second, we discuss how to assign a weight to
each risk category for each analyzed use case by means of using the regulatory texts as
the supervisor’s benchmark, and in the absence of a specific supervisor’s loss function
or usefulness measure, as summarized in Sarlin (2013). Assuming that policymakers are
not cost-ignorant and aim to facilitate innovation, we also acknowledge that they do not
disclose their loss function, which describes the trade-off between not allowing a model
to be deployed and permitting its use by financial institutions. Therefore, this second
phase allows financial institutions to interpret the regulation in the absence of this infor-
mation from supervisors. Notwithstanding this, the output of our framework can only
be read as a ranking of models based on their risk-adjusted performance, and it lacks the
knowledge on which threshold value to choose in order to determine the optimal model.
First phase: computing the risk scores
In “Identifying the risks: compatibility of ML with the IRB validation process” section,
we identified up to 13 factors that could constitute a source of model risk from the per-
spective of the supervisor during the validation process. We divided those factors into
three categories: statistics, technology, and market conduct. For a given ML model, we
assign a score in every category. The score ranges from 1 to 5, where 5 indicates the
highest level of risk perceived by the supervisor when deciding whether to approve the
model or not.
For each category, we focus on a subset of factors. In the statistics category we have
selected “Stability” and “Hyperparameters,” in the technology category we have selected
“Carbon Footprint” and “Transparency,” and in the market conduct category we have
selected “Interpretability.” We deemed these factors as representative for two reasons.
First, because they are highly relevant in their categories, and notably, their evaluation
has implications for the other factors. Second, because they can be computed using any
empirical database in the absence of prior information on specific characteristics of the
financial institution under consideration, while for the remaining factors, we need addi-
tional information. In any case, we include a discussion on how we could potentially
quantify the remaining factors in the “Appendix” section.
For the statistics category, we counted up to five factors: stability, overfitting, hyper-
parameters, dynamic calibration, and feature engineering or data pre-processing, hav-
ing selected “Stability” and “Hyperparameters” as highly representative. The first one,
if we count the number of mentions of “Stability” in the regulatory documents we have
collected (see “Second phase: assigning weights to risk categories” section for further
details), has 6.4 mentions per document, much more than hyperparameters (0.2 times
per document), overfitting (0.16), dynamic calibration (0.02), and feature engineering
(0.33). Therefore, we consider it as a preferred candidate for quantification. There are
different methods to measure the stability of a prediction. According to Dupont et al.Page 12 of 35 Alonso Robisco and Carbó Martínez ﻿FinancialInnovation (2022)8:70
(2020), the stability of the predictions can be understood as the absence of drift over
time, the generalization power when confronted with new data, and the absence of
instability issues during retraining. Either of these three descriptions works for our pur-
pose. However, because not every dataset contains temporal dimensions, we will focus
on the second and third definitions, measuring the standard deviation of the predictions
of the models when using different sample sizes, in particular, retraining the models 100
times, each with different sample sizes, always keeping it within the range between 60
and 100% of the training set. Thus, we can test the stability of the predictions. Addi-
tionally, we have also considered it relevant to count the number of hyperparameters,
as this factor is used for calculations once the ML model has been trained and validated,
and it might add valuable information on the remaining statistical factors, as it could be
argued that all of them would somehow be linked to the size of the models. Finally, we
show in the Appendix on pages 24 to 26 a suggestion on how the "Dynamic Calibration"
could be computed, along with suggestions on how to calculate "Overfitting" and "Fea-
ture Engineering."
For the technology category, we counted up to four factors: transparency, carbon foot-
print, third-party providers, and cyber-attacks. We have selected “Carbon Footprint” as
the most representative term because as we will explain below, with its calculation we
could get an approximation of the magnitude of the remaining factors in this category,
as all of them rely on the required computer power to run the algorithms. We measure
it through the model training latency, that is, how long in seconds it takes to train the
model. For the sake of completeness, we also consider the “Transparency” of the models
by first distinguishing between parametric and nonparametric models. Among the non-
parametric models, we consider that deep learning models are more complex than tree-
based models because the number of parameters to estimate is higher. However, while
the calculation of the risk factors "third-party providers" and "Cyber ​​ risks" will depend
on the specific dataset and the particular circumstances of the financial institution, they
share with “Carbon Footprint” the underlying importance of the computer require-
ments. The longer it takes to train a model, the more likely it is that the user needs some
cloud service (thus increasing the risk of the third-party provider), and the more prone
processes can be to cyber-attacks. We further discuss how we could potentially calculate
these two technological risk factors in the “Appendix” section.
For the market conduct category, we counted up to four factors: privacy, auditability,
interpretability, and bias. We have selected “Interpretability” as the most relevant term
in the category. We assign a score for “Interpretability” to a given ML model using the
latency (number of seconds) of the computation of the SHAP values for the explana-
tion of the results. SHAP (Lundberg and Lee 2017) is an interpretability technique that
allows for the global and local interpretation of any model. There is an ongoing debate
on the efficacy of SHAP as an ML interpretation tool (see the “Literature review” sec-
tion). In any case, SHAP, along with permutation feature importance, is one of the most
popular options for interpreting complex ML models. If we use an ML model to predict
a target variable based on a set of features, SHAP can rank all the features depending
on their importance in the final prediction. The ranking of a given feature depends on
its contribution to the predicted result in a particular observation, compared with the
average prediction. These contributions are known as Shapley values. Once the ShapelyPage 13 of 35 Alonso Robisco and Carbó Martínez ﻿FinancialInnovation (2022)8:70
values for each feature and each instance have been computed, we can obtain the overall
SHAP importance by adding them together.19
Both SHAP and permutation feature importance have advantages and limitations
(Molnar 2019), but it seems that SHAP, despite its drawbacks, is gaining popularity as
the leading global interpretation technique (Hall et al. 2021). While SHAP can deliver
a clear ranking among features, it is computationally expensive. Therefore, we consider
that the time and resources required to execute SHAP could be a good proxy for how
easy it is to interpret a model. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt
to use a standard explainable artificial intelligence technique, common in the academic
literature, in the supervisory model validation process to provide assistance to market
participants interpreting the regulation.
To calculate the remaining risk factors in the market conduct category, we need infor-
mation that may not be included in all the databases. For example, to calculate "Bias,” we
would need information from features’ labels, and these features should contain sensi-
tive information. It is not always possible to access this type of information. In any case,
we consider that our “Interpretability” score can be a reference for the rest of the risk
factors in the market conduct category, as understanding how easy it is to interpret a
model could be a proxy itself for how easy it would be to detect biases, the probability
of breaching privacy rules, and the traceability of the model. We discuss how we could
potentially calculate "Bias,” "Privacy," and "Auditability" in the “Appendix” section.
Second phase: assigning weights to risk categories
How important should each category be when determining the risk in the ML model? In
the second phase, we assign weights to each category depending on the purpose of the
model. We consider three possible use cases: regulatory capital, credit scoring and mon-
itoring, and provisioning. For example, it could be argued that interpretability should
matter more if the purpose of the model is to grant new credit, but less if the purpose is
to compute provisions on outstanding loans.
The ideal way to carry out this exercise would be to know the real preferences of
supervisors when assessing these three risks. However, these preferences are unknown
or ambiguous at best. Therefore, we propose a method to estimate weights for the risk
categories that reflect their actual regulatory importance in each possible model use.
For each risk category, we create terminology with a list of representative words (plus
their lemmatization) associated with the category based on expert knowledge. The lists
are provided in the Appendix Table 11. We include 54 words for the statistics category,
30 words for the technology category, and 51 words for the market conduct category.
Although this list is not exhaustive, we aim to obtain a representative sample of words
for each category. Thereafter, we select a sample of regulatory documents referring to
each of the three possible use cases (capital, credit scoring, provisioning) and a set of
documents that we assume belong to a common area, as they refer to all possible uses
19
To compute the Shapley value of a feature of interest for a given instance, we start by considering all possible coali-
tions of features that exclude the feature of interest, including the empty set. For all those different coalitions, we com-
pute the difference in the predicted outcome with and without the feature of interest. The Shapley value of the feature of
interest is the weighted average of the differences in the predictions among all coalitions. When the number of features
is high, the number of coalitions can be almost impossible to manage, and that is why there are several techniques for
approximating the results.Page 14 of 35 Alonso Robisco and Carbó Martínez ﻿FinancialInnovation (2022)8:70
of the model. A methodical search for each purpose of the models has been conducted
in the repository of the European Banking Authority, Basel Committee on Banking
Supervision, and European Central Bank. Further documents referring in particular to
artificial intelligence have been included, as a recent proposal from the European Com-
mission (“Artificial Intelligence Act”) or working papers from central banks (e.g., Bracke
et al. 2019; Dupont et al. 2020). Finally, some guidelines from auditors or international
institutions, such as the World Bank, have been selected because of their reliability. The
selection of texts includes binding requirements and non-binding recommendations.
This list is included in Table 12 of the Appendix. The weight of the risk categories in each
use of the model depends on the number of times the terms of the category are men-
tioned in the model’s use documents.
Consequently, we have three risk categories (statistics, technology, and market con-
duct), and four sets of regulatory documents (capital, credit scoring, provisions, and
common area). Let us call Hi,j,k the percentage of words from risk category i over all
words of document k belonging to a set of documents j:
whereWi,j,k refers to the number of times a word from risk category i appears in docu-
ment k from the set of documents j, and Nk is the total number of words in document
k. We call Hi,common the overall frequency of risk category i in the common area set of
documents:
where Mcommon refers to the number of documents collected from a common area.
Finally, we compute the overall relative frequency of risk category i in a model using j as:
where Mj is the total number of documents analyzed for model use j.
In Fig. 3 and Table 2, we compare the overall relative frequency of words for each risk
category: capital, credit scoring, and provisions. Our results show that the statistics risk
category is more important for capital requirements, whereas technology and market
conduct risks are more important for credit scoring. Another key insight is that while
capital and credit scoring have approximately 14% of the percentage of mentions of the
three risk categories, provisions has only 12%. This may indicate that provisioning is the
area with the lowest perceived supervisory model risk.
Are these differences significant? In Table 3 we check if the average intensity of the
categories is significantly different across the model´s uses. We perform a t-test based on
the following T statistic, built under the null hypothesis that two means of the popula-
tions are equal.
Hi,j,k = Wi,j,k/Nk
Hi,common =
Mcommon
k
Hi,common,k/Mcommon
Hi,j =
Mj

k
Hi,j,k/Mj + HcommonPage 15 of 35 Alonso Robisco and Carbó Martínez ﻿FinancialInnovation (2022)8:70
where Mean1 and Mean2 are the mean values ​​ of each sample, s1 and s2 are the standard
deviations of the two samples, n1 and n2 are the sample sizes of the two samples, and n-1
are the degrees of freedom. With the T statistic value and degrees of freedom, we can
compute the corresponding p-values of every possible comparison of means. The p val-
ues are shown in Table 3. It can be seen that the differences between capital and credit
scoring are significant for statistics and market conduct, the differences between capital
and provisions are significant for statistics and technology, and the differences for credit
scoring and provisions are significant for technology and market conduct. We recog-
nize that the number of mentions of these risk factors in the selected documents may be
insufficient to reflect their importance. Therefore, we perform a robustness analysis, in
which, instead of counting the number of times the risk terms appear in the documents,
we count the number of negative words that surround each mention of those terms. In
this way, we can capture the intensity with which the terms appear (counting the times
they appear in the documents) and the tone toward them (counting the negative words
that surround them). The results are presented in the Appendix, “Robustness exercise:
sentiment analysis” section, in this document, and they complement the results of the
benchmark exercise. We leave the construction of a more complex sentiment analysis on
Tstatistic =
Mean1 − Mean2

S2
1
n1
+
S2
2
n2
Table 2 Overall relative frequency of categories in model uses
Statistics Technology Market conduct Total
Capital 7.90% 2.50% 3.75% 14.15%
Credit scoring 6.41% 3.09% 5.13% 14.63%
Provisions 6.38% 2.36% 3.90% 12.64%
0.00%
1.00%
2.00%
3.00%
4.00%
5.00%
6.00%
7.00%
8.00%
9.00%
Frequency of words
Average Credit Scoring
Average Provisions
Average Capital
Market Conduct Statistics Techonology
Fig. 3 Comparison between different model purposesPage 16 of 35 Alonso Robisco and Carbó Martínez ﻿FinancialInnovation (2022)8:70
the perception of statistical, market conduct, and technological risks in different uses of
the model for further investigation.
Once we have computed the score of the ML models for each risk category and the
relative importance of risk categories for each possible use case, we can define the super-
visory model risk of the ML algorithm m for use j as follows:
where Zi,m is the darkness score (after the black box definition surrounding ML) of
model m for risk category i, and Hi,j is the overall relative frequency of risk category i in
a model use j.
For instance, the darkness Z of model m in the category i=statistics, should capture
the ordinal importance for the model validator of each risk factor (i.e., stability of pre-
dictions, number of hyperparameters, overfitting, dynamic calibration, and feature engi-
neering) between all models being evaluated. As every risk category will be calculated
based on heterogeneous proxy variables with different measurement scales, we propose
to leave at the discretion of the model validator (e.g., the supervisor) how to aggregate
them into a single score Zi,m. For illustrative reasons, we will assume in Table 4 a discrete
choice between the range [1,5] for each Zi,m. Assuming that we are comparing five dif-
ferent models, the darkest (riskiest) possible model would have a maximum value of 5 in
every category. Therefore, we can compute the darkness score of any given model, nor-
malizing the respective Zi,m using the maximum score, and thus obtain a relative valua-
tion of the model riskiness.
Supervisory model riskiness for capital=(2 * 7.9+4 * 2.5+3 * 3.75)/(5 * 7.9+5 * 2.5
+5 * 3.75)=0.523.
Supervisory model riskiness for credit scoring=(2 * 6.41+4 * 3.09+3 * 5.13)/(5 * 6.4
1+5 * 3.09+5 * 5.13)=0.554.
Supervisory model riskiness for provisioning=(2 * 6.38+4 * 2.36+3 * 3.90)/
(5 * 6.38+5 * 2.36+5 * 3.90)=0.536.
The construction of the supervisory model riskiness is a multidisciplinary task that
aims to quantify the requirements to comply with the regulation. While expert knowl-
edge of statistics and technology is required in the first phase to open the algorithmic
black box, an in-depth understanding of financial supervision is key in the second phase
to break down how the model fits into the regulatory requirements. Our scorecard
offers a structured methodology for estimating this exercise from a neutral standpoint,
Supervisorymodel riskm,j =
3 
i
Hi,jZi,m
Table 3 Hypothesis contrast (p value) about difference in mean values
Bold means that differences between model uses are statistically significant at 10% of significance level
Statistics Technology Market conduct
Capital versus credit scoring 0.0181 0.1897 0.003
Capital versus provisions 0.0133 0.0180 0.5618
Credit scoring versus provisions 0.9404 0.1097 0.0128Page 17 of 35 Alonso Robisco and Carbó Martínez ﻿FinancialInnovation (2022)8:70
identifying for the first time a set of risk categories and their corresponding risk compo-
nents that may be quantified using some proxy variables. Indeed, we assume no prefer-
ences from the supervisor or model validator for the weight of each risk category, which
is estimated directly from the regulatory texts. This will allow supervisors to provide
credit institutions with a neutral assessment of ML as a technology to be used in predic-
tive models in a standardized format.20
Notwithstanding this, further research is needed
to investigate different alternatives to aggregate the identified proxy variables into each
score Zi,m.
An empirical example
In this Section, we propose an empirical example of the framework using a database
available at Kaggle.com, called "Give me some credit". It contains data on 120,000 granted
loans. For each loan, a binary variable indicates whether the loan has defaulted. Addi-
tionally, 11 characteristics are known for each loan: borrower age, debt ratio, number of
existing loans, monthly income, number of open credit lines, number of revolving credit
accounts, number of real estate loans, number of dependents, and the number of times
the borrower has been 30, 60, and 90 days past due. To capture nonlinear relationships,
we include the square of these characteristics as additional variables until we have a total
of 22 explanatory variables. We apply the framework to five of the models that appear
most frequently in the academic literature on credit default prediction: penalized logistic
regression via LASSO, decision tree, random forest, XGBoost, and deep neural network.
The deep learning model used in our study is an artificial neural network in which we
consider the possibility of having three to six hidden layers. Therefore, we use a mul-
tilayer perceptron model, where the number of hidden layers and nodes in each layer
has been chosen according to proper cross-validation to obtain the largest AUC in the
validation sample. In particular, we divide our data into training (80%) and testing (20%)
sets. We choose the hyperparameters for each model that maximize the AUC-ROC out-
of-sample through a fivefold cross-validation. The hyperparameters of each model are as
follows: the depth of trees for CART (7), the depth of trees and the number of trees for
random forest (20 and 100, respectively), the depth of trees and the number of trees for
XGBoost (5 and 40), and finally the optimal number of hidden layers (3) and nodes (300,
200, and 100), while activation functions would be rectified linear unit for the hidden
layers and sigmoid for the output layer, and the optimization method is Adam.
Table 4 Example scorecard of a model risk assessment
Risk category Darkness Score % Regulatory
capital
% Credit scoring % Provisions
Statistics 2 7.9% 6.41% 6.38%
Technology 4 2.5% 3.09% 2.36%
Conduct 3 3.75% 5.13% 3.9%
20
This challenge is not the first of its kind to occur in financial supervision. For instance, when assessing the capital
requirements for market risk, supervisors have agreed on the methodology (i.e.: Value-at-Risk, or Expected Shortfall)
but discretionally assume that in the back testing the surcharges due to deviations from the estimations are calculated
simply by using a traffic-light test, BIS (1996).Page 18 of 35 Alonso Robisco and Carbó Martínez ﻿FinancialInnovation (2022)8:70
As mentioned before, we will use a subset of five risk factors that we deem representa-
tive of each risk category to showcase this methodology. In “First phase: computing the
risk scores” section, we provide a comprehensive explanation of why we choose these
five proxies. In summary, we selected factors that could be representative of their cor-
responding categories, which could be estimated using a common credit database and
in the absence of prior information on specific characteristics of the financial institution
under consideration. In the “Appendix” section, we suggest a method for quantifying the
remaining components of model risk. We leave for future research a deeper discussion
on the calculation of these factors.
Our results for the scores of the five aforementioned models are shown in Table 5 and
in Fig. 4 we map the assessed riskiness of each model per risk factor into a scorecard.
Model risk
We calculate the score for statistics based on the models’ stability and the number of
hyperparameters, as these two factors stand out as highly relevant in this category (see
“First phase: computing the risk scores” section for a detailed explanation of this). For
the stability of the predictions, we show the standard deviation in the AUC-ROC for 100
simulations with different train–test partitions. It can be seen that the models with the
highest standard deviations are deep learning and CART, whereas the models with the
lowest standard deviations are LASSO and XGBoost. Computing the number of hyper-
parameters is straightforward, that is, the LASSO model with the lowest need for hyper-
parameters and the deep learning model with the highest need. Considering the values
for these factors, we assign a score of 1 to LASSO, a score of 2 to XGBoost, a score of 3
to both CART and random forest, and a score of 5 to deep learning. As mentioned in
“Quantifying the model risk” section, we aggregate the estimations of each proxy vari-
able in each risk category into a single score using expert knowledge.21
The technology score will depend only on the models’ transparency and on the latency
of the training, measured in seconds (see “First phase: computing the risk scores” section
for an explanation of why we focus on those two factors). For the model´s transparency,
following our explanation in “Literature review” section, LASSO falls into the category
of parametric models, CART into nonparametric models, random forest and XGBoost
Table 5 Scorecard phase 1:“measuring the darkness of the algorithmic black-boxes”
Lasso CART​ RF XGBoost MLP
Statistics Stability (SD) 0.001 0.005 0.003 0.001 0.002
Number hyper-parameters 0 1 2 2 +5
Darkness Score 1 3 3 2 5
Technology Latency training 3.92 s 0.67 s 19.25 s 1.29 s 31.42 s
Transparency 1 2 3 3 5
Darkness Score 1 1 3 2 5
Market conduct Latency SHAP 0 0 60 s 8 s 2000 s
Darkness Score 1 1 2 2 3
21
c.f. footnote 20.Page 19 of 35 Alonso Robisco and Carbó Martínez ﻿FinancialInnovation (2022)8:70
into the category of nonparametric ensemble models, and finally, deep learning falls into
the most complex category. Considering the latency of training, we assign a score of 1 to
LASSO and CART, 2 to XGBoost, 3 to random forest, and a score of 5 to deep learning.
The score for market conduct will be calculated based on the latency of the SHAP
method measured in seconds, as we find this as a good proxy for the feasibility of inter-
preting a black box model, and therefore how easy it would be to spot biases and audit
them (IIF 2019c), capturing the interconnectedness between all risk market conduct risk
factors (see “First phase: computing the risk scores” section for a detailed explanation).22
As mentioned in “First phase: computing the risk scores” section, for a given ML model,
SHAP is a technique that allows us to rank the features according to their contribution
to the predicted result for a particular instance, compared to the average prediction
of the entire dataset. These contributions can be added to obtain the final importance
of the features (for more details, see “First phase: computing the risk scores” section).
Therefore, SHAP allows us to interpret the decisions and predictions of any ML model.
However, evaluating SHAP contributions is computationally expensive. Therefore, we
consider the time (latency) required to implement SHAP to be a good signal of how easy
it is to interpret an ML model. Because interpretability is one of the main issues in mar-
ket conduct risk, we consider that SHAP latency can be used as a good proxy for this
category. While we are interested in the time it takes to compute the SHAP values, we
include in Figs. 6 and 8 of the Appendix, the results from the application of SHAP to the
ML models.
Because LASSO and CART are interpretable models, we assign them a score of (1).
For XGBoost and random forest, we assign a score of (2) because the latency of the
SHAP method is relatively low. We assign a score of (3) to deep learning because of the
long time it takes to calculate its SHAP values.
Once we assign the score to each category for the five models, we use the weighting for
different use cases to compute the overall model risk, as shown in Table 6. Independent
of the purpose of the model, LASSO has the lowest model risk and deep learning has
-
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
Lasso
CART
Random Forest XGBoost
Multi-layer Percepton
Statistics
Technology
Market Conduct
Fig. 4 Breaking down the models’riskiness
22
In any case, as mentioned before, we suggest a way to compute each remaining factor separately in the “Appendix”
section.Page 20 of 35 Alonso Robisco and Carbó Martínez ﻿FinancialInnovation (2022)8:70
the highest. CART has a higher model risk than XGBoost for capital (owing to its poor
stability) and a lower perceived model risk when using it for provisioning and credit.
Provisions is the purpose with less model risk from a supervisory perspective, especially
for deep learning, thus reflecting the flexible nature of statistical modeling regulation in
this area. The net amounts of regulatory requirements for credit scoring and capital are
very similar. While the statistical requirements for credit scoring are lower than those
for regulatory capital (6.41% vs. 7.9% frequency of terms’ occurrence), this is offset by
the higher level of requirements regarding market conduct issues in this area, which has
a frequency of occurrence of 5.13% in our texts, compared to 3.75%, respectively. How-
ever, the level of implementation observed in the industry nowadays indicates that credit
scoring is a field in which ML is being deployed more actively (see IIF 2019a). This could
imply that the statistical requirement represents a barrier to the introduction of ML in
the short term, whereas the need for interpretable results of ML (associated with market
conduct requirements) represents a challenge in the medium term.
Gross predictive performance
There are different methods to compute the prediction gains of an ML model. As we
showed before, one of the most popular measures, and the one we will use, is to compare
the statistical performance of the models using the AUC-ROC metric.23
The results are
presented in Table 7, where we show the increase in the AUC-ROC of each model with
respect to the one achieved by logit.24
XGBoost is the model with the largest gain in
terms of prediction, approximately 5% in the AUC-ROC, followed by the random forest
with 4%, and deep learning with 1.7%. CART and LASSO have 0.4% and 0.2% gains on
average, respectively, compared with logit. This ranking based on AUC-ROC gains is in
line with the results from the literature reviewed in Fig. 1, where the models with the
Table 6 Scorecard phase 2: computing the supervisory riskiness for regulatory capital
Lasso CART​ RF XGBoost MLP
Statistics 1 3 3 2 4
Capital: 7.9%
Credit: 6.41%
Provisions: 6.38%
Technology 1 1 3 2 5
Capital: 2.5%
Credit: 3.09%
Provisions: 2.36%
Market conduct 1 1 2 2 3
Capital: 3.75%
Credit: 5.13%
Provisions: 3.9%
Supervisory model risk capital 14.15 29.95 38.7 28.3 55.35
Supervisory model risk credit 14.63 27.45 38.76 29.26 56.48
Supervisory model risk provisions 12.64 25.4 34.02 25.28 49,02
23
Other measures include GINI, Kolmogorov–Smirnov or the confusion matrix.
24
The average AUC-ROC for Logit is around 80%Page 21 of 35 Alonso Robisco and Carbó Martínez ﻿FinancialInnovation (2022)8:70
highest prediction gains are XGBoost and random forest, and deep learning does not
necessarily predict better than the other algorithms. Because our dataset lacks a time
dimension, it is not possible to calculate the predictive performance using reinforcement
learning algorithms or convolutional neural networks.25
Although this particular rank-
ing among ML models may change when other databases are used, our exercise provides
a quantification of the predictive gains that will assist us in the challenge of measuring
the risk-adjusted performance of these models.
Model risk‑adjusted predictive performance
Once we know the model risk of the algorithms (Table 6) and their gross predictive per-
formance (Table 7), we plot their risk-adjusted performances in Fig. 5. CART shows a
moderate increase in predictive performance with respect to logit, but it does show a
considerable increase in riskiness. However, while random forest and XGBoost have
similar levels of riskiness compared to CART, they display a better predictive perfor-
mance. In any case, XGBoost clearly outperforms the other models as the most risk-
efficient. This is driven by the good results of this model in terms of the computational
power required (approximated by the latency), comprehensive statistical nature (stabil-
ity of predictions), and interpretability (quantified using computability of SHAP values),
which allows it to be a well-balanced solution for the regulatory requirements for all
purposes, compared to the rest of the ML models. In any case, this exercise should be
complemented with more advanced calculations of the performance of the ML models
as, for instance, it might be argued that the benefits of being able to classify better credit
defaults are more important in credit scoring than in capital, or that the calibration of
the models (which might behave differently depending on the level of PD) will be crucial
for computing provisions (expected loss, i.e., higher PD) or capital (unexpected loss, i.e.,
lower PD). Therefore, more research should be conducted on this dimension (Alonso
and Carbó 2021). Furthermore, this exercise refers only to the supply side of the ML
models. To find an “optimal model” in equilibrium, we should strike a balance with an
indifference curve representing supervisors’ preferences.
This empirical exercise shows the potential for this methodology to discern the impor-
tant factors inside the “algorithmic black box,” and connect them in a realistic manner
Table 7 Results of the estimated AUC-ROC using“Give Me Some Credit”dataset
Logit Lasso CART​ Random forest XGBoost MLP
AUC-ROC 80% 80.2% 80.4% 84.2% 85.3% 81.7%
AUC-ROC
95% interval
79.3%
80.7%
79.6%
80.8%
79.7%
81.2%
83.7%
84.8%
84.8%
85.8%
81%
82.3%
AUC-ROC (differ-
ence with logit)
– 0.2% 0.4% 4.2% 5.3% 1.7%
25
Unlike supervised algorithms, reinforcement learning algorithms receive an assessment for each given response,
and learn based on the reward or punishment they receive for hit or miss, so the time dimension of loans would be an
essential variable for reinforcement learning. Instead, we extrapolated in “Model risk-adjusted predictive performance”
section the prediction gains for reinforcement learning as a function of the gains from Deep Learning (deep neural net-
work).Page 22 of 35 Alonso Robisco and Carbó Martínez ﻿FinancialInnovation (2022)8:70
with the regulatory requirements to obtain a transparent result that is easier to commu-
nicate to the banking industry.
Conclusion
According to recent surveys, credit institutions in the field of credit risk management
are at different stages of ML implementation. These range from the calculation of regula-
tory capital to credit scoring or estimation of provisions. In this environment, financial
authorities face the challenge of allowing financial institutions and clients to maximize
the opportunities derived from progress and innovation, while observing the principles
of technological neutrality, regulatory compliance, and consumer protection. To duly
address this challenge, we present a framework to measure the model risk-adjusted per-
formance of ML used in the area of credit default prediction.
To calculate the model risk when evaluating the statistical performance of ML, we first
identified 13 factors that could make this technology incompatible with the IRB valida-
tion system. We divided these 13 factors into three categories, statistics, technology, and
market conduct, and described a procedure to assign a score to each category based on
the ML model being used. The importance of these categories when calculating model
risk depends on the use of the model itself (credit scoring, regulatory capital, or provi-
sions). We collect a series of regulatory documents for each use case, and, using NLP, we
compute the importance of each risk category according to the intensity of mentions.
We find that statistical risks are more important for regulatory capital, while technology
and market conduct risks are more important for credit scoring. We tested our frame-
work to measure the model risk of five of the most popular ML algorithms, using a pub-
licly available credit default database. When comparing the model risk of each of them
with their respective predictive performance in terms of the AUC-ROC, we can assess
which of the ML models have a better risk-adjusted performance.
Thus, the evolution of ML in the financial sector must consider the supervisory inter-
nal model valuation process. It should also be in line with the explanatory needs of the
results, something that the academic literature is promoting with important develop-
ments in the field of interpretable ML. Several challenges remain for further research.
First, all variables in each risk category were measured methodically. Of particular inter-
est could be to investigate new approaches to capture the presence of risk factors in
the regulatory texts relating to statistics, technology and market conduct. For instance,
0.00%
1.00%
2.00%
3.00%
4.00%
5.00%
6.00%
0.00 0.10 0.20 0.30 0.40 0.50 0.60
Gains in prediction (AUC-ROC)
Supervisory model riskiness
Credit scoring
Provisioning
Capital
Lasso CART
Random
forest
XGBoost
Multi-layer
Percepton
Fig. 5 Risk-reward, by model purposePage 23 of 35 Alonso Robisco and Carbó Martínez ﻿FinancialInnovation (2022)8:70
using latent Dirichlet allocation (Blei et al. 2003) for topic modeling, or keyword discov-
ery (Sarica et al. 2019) for semantic research could support the reproducibility of the
results, as well as our methodology based on expert risk terminology. In addition, the
benefits of employing ML models using larger datasets should be quantified. Integrating
macro-prudential considerations into this assessment could be the cornerstone of any
policy decision. For this purpose, further assumptions could be made regarding supervi-
sors’ preferences to assess how banks respond when choosing models with certain risks.
Appendix
On the computation of the remaining components of ML model risk
Statistics
Overfitting is a problem that arises when the predictive model has poor generalization
performance. The more specialized the model is on the training data, the less it can gen-
eralize on new test data. To calculate the overfitting, we can compare the performance
of the model (the loss function) on the train sample and on the test sample after each
update during training or after including more data. The graphical representation of this
comparison is called the "learning curve". We might consider an overfitting problem to
exist if the training loss plot decreases with experience, while the validation loss plot
does not decrease, or decreases to a point and starts to increase again.
Dynamic calibration refers to the need to re-train the model as new data is fed con-
tinually into the system. While a static model can be trained offline, a dynamic model
adapts to changing data which requires to be trained online, incorporating new obser-
vations through continues updates. Today, thanks to new technologies, many sources
of information actually change over time, so the more features the model has, the
greater the need to monitor the input data for changes. In this sense, since ML is capa-
ble of handling larger amounts of data (EBA 2020), we could represent this risk compo-
nent by counting the number of features that the model has in production, after data
pre-processing.
Feature engineering is necessary in those ML models that require the transformation
of input variables or features to work correctly or to improve their performance. On the
other hand, by transforming the variables and not dealing with raw data, we could lose
control over their economic sense.
A non-exhaustive list of techniques considered as feature engineering could include:
(1) Data imputation (numerical and categorical), (2) Handling outliers (cap or drop the
observation), (3) Binning, (4) Log transformation, (5) One-hot encoding (transform a
categorical variable into a set of binary values), (6) Grouping observations (e.g.: highly
correlated variables), (7) Feature split, (8) Scaling (either normalizing or standardizing),
or (9) extracting a date. One way to calculate the feature engineering risk factor for dif-
ferent ML models could be to assess how sensitive the performance of ML model is to
some of the aforementioned techniques.
Technologycategory
Third party-providers constitutes a risk exposure to the extent that an institution cannot
control the outcome of a service within its own in-house risk framework. This would bePage 24 of 35 Alonso Robisco and Carbó Martínez ﻿FinancialInnovation (2022)8:70
subject to the characteristics of the IT system and human capital of each institution. The
more complexity the ML model presents, the higher the probability that an institution
requires outsourcing to an external SaaS26
provider. This could be proxied by a dummy
variable if an ML model requires outsourcing or not.
Cyber-risk is a sub-class of third-party provider risk, but due to its potential impact it
deserves to be evaluated separately. Our aim is to assess a potential change in the risk
exposure if an institution requires too much computational power (number of opera-
tions per second) forcing it to shift from in-house deployment to cloud services.
Usually preparing an ML model for production involves four steps: (1) Pre-processing
input data, (2) Training the model, (3) Storing the trained model, and (4) Deployment of
the model. Clearly, training the ML model is the most computationally intensive task,
especially for Deep Learning. In this scenario, we define cyber-risk as cloud migration
risk (Akinrolabu et al. 2019), which could be evaluated as the marginal contribution of
a single ML model to the total computational requirements of the overall models cur-
rently in production in the institution.
Marketconductcategory
Privacy refers to the legal mandate to protect personal data, as any piece of informa-
tion that relates to an identifiable person. Both in the US27
and EU28
institutions must
comply with strict security and privacy requirements, as regulators strive to protect
discrimination in credit decisions by automated systems. The fact that ML models can
better unravel patterns in consumer data has raised concerns about whether they might
be unintentionally using sensitive information to generate the predictions. In this con-
text, the notion of data minimisation (to collect as little data as possible and hold it for
as short a time as possible according to the purpose for which it was collected) arises.
This runs against ML as an enabler of big data analysis, and requires a qualitative assess-
ment on the probability of each model being able to comply with current legal require-
ments. This would depend on variables such as the number of features, the number of
transformations during data pre-processing and the frequency of updates in data feed-
ing, as well as in-house characteristics of the financial institution regarding data storage
architecture.
Auditability is required to comply with model risk governance regulation both in US29
and EU.30
Institutions must be able to ensure the robustness, traceability, auditability
and resilience of the models. This would include dealing with issues like time or stor-
age limitations for deployment, and production bottlenecks in delivering certain models
26
Software as a System.
27
See for instance Smith (2020), detailing the work of the Federal Trade Commission on privacy and data security in
artificial intelligence.
28
The EU’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) defines in Article 4 “personal data” as any information relating
to an identified or identifiable natural person. An identifiable natural person is one who can be identified, directly or
indirectly, in particular by reference to an identifier such as a name, an identification number, location data, an online
identifier or to one or more factors specific to the physical, physiological, genetic, mental, economic, cultural or social
identity of that natural person.
29
The Federal Reserve Board’s Supervisory & Regulation Letter 11-7 is often used to refer to all three US agencies’ guid-
ance.
30
See for instance EBA (2019b), on Loan Origination and Monitoring, and EC (2021) with the proposal for a regulation
of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence (artificial intel-
ligence act).Page 25 of 35 Alonso Robisco and Carbó Martínez ﻿FinancialInnovation (2022)8:70
to the market, as well as an adequate understanding by the management. This becomes
a challenge for ML, which require re-training of models, and complex statistical pro-
cesses. Therefore, an idea would be to use surrogate models, as a solution that mimics
the decision boundary of an original complex model, but through interpretable or “white
box” models as regressions or simple classification trees. New techniques are now avail-
able that attempt to copy the behaviour of ML models, retaining the original accuracy,
but including desired characteristics like interpretability, or reduced number of features
(see Unceta et al. 2020). Following this rationale, if a sufficiently accurate copy of an ML
model could be found, then we could conclude that there exists a low level of auditability
risk.
Biases and potential discrimination in credit decisions by automated systems raised
early concerns within regulators both in US31
and EU.32
Institutions need to ensure that
any model’s decision does not rely upon any protected characteristic of an individual.
In this context, new ML interpretability techniques, like counterfactuals, are showing
promising results, as mentioned in Wachter et al. (2017). The underlying idea would be
to use adversarial perturbations by generating synthetic data points close to an existing
one (e.g.: race, either white or black) such that the new instance is classified differently
than the original one. For example, a counterfactual analysis could suggest for a particu-
lar classifier to change the race only to “black” people in order to alter the outcome of
the model, while not suggesting that “white” people’s race should be varied. If the result
of the counterfactual analysis shows that there is some discriminant variable that affects
the result of an ML model, then we consider that there is a risk of bias for that model.
SHAPresultsfromempiricalexercise
As we discussed in the main text, SHAP is an interpretability technique of ML models
that allows us to classify characteristics according to their contribution to the predic-
tion of the ML model. It is model agnostic, so it could be applied to the result of any
ML modelling technique. Executing this method requires a considerable amount of
time. For this reason, we view the time it takes to run SHAP as a signal of market con-
duct risk. Therefore, in our framework, what we are mostly interested in is the latency
measured in seconds of SHAP execution for different ML models. In this Section, we
show for illustrative purposes the results of SHAP when applied to Random Forest,
XGBoost, and Deep Learning in our empirical exercise. The results are in Figs. 6, 7
and 8. Features are ranked from most important to least important. The colour red is
associated with high values of the feature, and the colour blue is associated with low
values ​​ of the feature. On the x-axis we can find the impact of the features on the out-
put of the ML model. To understand these numbers, we can take a look at Fig. 6. The
31
The Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA) prohibits discrimination in “any aspect of a credit transaction” for both
consumer and commercial credit on the basis of race, colour, national origin, religion, sex, marital status, age, or certain
other protected characteristics, and the Fair Housing Act (FHA) prohibits discrimination on many of the same bases in
connection with residential mortgage lending.
32
European Commission’s Guide to Ethical Principles of AI (2019) cites the principle of explicability of algorithms as
one of the critical elements, and in accordance with the European General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) Article
22 on automated individual decision-making, including profiling, the data subject shall have the right not to be subject
to a decision based solely on automated processing, implying that decisions […] shall not be based on special categories
of personal data and pointing to the need to include human judgement in any decision-making process (i.e.: data con-
troller).Page 26 of 35 Alonso Robisco and Carbó Martínez ﻿FinancialInnovation (2022)8:70
fact that "NumberOfTimpes90DaysLate" appears first means that, on average, it is the
characteristic with the greatest impact on the Random Forest predictions. The higher
the values ​​ of this characteristic, the greater the impact on the model. This is the
opposite of what happens to "Age". The higher the "Age", the lower the impact of the
model. The ranking of features slightly changes from one model to another. The fea-
tures “NumberOfTimpes90DaysLate” and “NumberOfTime3-0-59DaysPastDueNot-
Worse” appear for the three models among the top three most important variables.
But there are some discrepancies. For instance, “RevolvingUtilizationOfUnsecured-
Lines” appears as the most important variable for the outcome in XGBoost, but not
for the output in random forest and deep learning. On the other hand, “Age” always
appears the fourth most important variable, and its impact has always the same direc-
tion. We leave for further research the study of these discrepancies.
Robustnessexercise:sentimentanalysis
In our main exercise, in order to weight each risk category (statistics, technology, market
conduct) for each possible use case (capital, credit rating, provisions), we first select a
Fig. 6 SHAP interpretation of Random Forest in the empirical example
Fig. 7 SHAP interpretation of XGBoost in the empirical examplePage 27 of 35 Alonso Robisco and Carbó Martínez ﻿FinancialInnovation (2022)8:70
series of regulatory documents for each use of the model, and then we count the num-
ber of mentions of terms related to statistical, technological and market conduct risks in
those documents (see Table 11). We recognize that the number of times a term is men-
tioned in a document may not be indicative of its importance in the document, or of the
sentiment in the document toward the term. For this reason, we complement our main
analysis with the exercise that we report below.
Maintaining the same regulatory documents as in our main exercise, we now count
the number of negative words surrounding each mention of terms related to statistical,
technological, and market conduct risks in those documents. We use the dictionary by
Hu and Liu (2004), which is a popular and comprehensive list of negative words in Eng-
lish with up to 4780 terms.33
Our goal is to weight the number of surrounding negative
words by the number of mentions of the terms in every document.
Let i refer to the risk categories (statistics, technology, and market conduct), let j refer
to the types of regulatory documents (capital, credit scoring, provisions), and k to any
document. We count the number of negative words, if any, that are within d words34
of
distance of each mention of terms from category i in each document of type j. We save
that counting in vector Xk,i,j, a vector with as many positions as mentions of terms from
risk category i in document k of type j.
We then calculate Ti,j as the average number of negative terms in the d words sur-
rounding the mentions of terms from category i in the type j as follows:
where Xn
k,i,j is the nth position of vector Xk,i,j (i.e.: the number of negative words within d
words of the nth mention of a term from category i in document k of type j), term Kj
indicates the total number of documents on a type of regulatory documents j, and term
Nk,i,j indicates the number of mentions of terms from risk category i in document k of
type j.
Ti,j =
Kj
k=1
Nk,i,j
n=1 Xn
k,i,j
Kj
k=1 Nk,i,j
Fig. 8 SHAP interpretation of Deep Learning in the empirical example
33
We acknowledge, as stated by one of the creators of the dictionary, Bing Liu (2010), that the appearance of one or
more negative words in a sentence that contains the term of interest does not necessarily imply a negative sentiment.
Still, we believe the exercise serves us to approximate the interest.
34
We have tried different specification for parameter d, as d=5, 10, 15 and 20.Page 28 of 35 Alonso Robisco and Carbó Martínez ﻿FinancialInnovation (2022)8:70
This way, instead of calculating the intensity of the appearance of the term, we meas-
ure the tone toward the term. The results are shown in Tables 8 and 9, for d=10 and
20 respectively (the results do not change substantially for different values ​​ of d like d=5
or d=15). In those tables we show the average negative words surrounding the risk
terms by risk category and by use of the model. One of our main findings is that senti-
ment regarding technology and market conduct risks is more negative for credit scoring
than for regulatory capital and provisions. In documents related to credit scoring, terms
related to technology and conduct risk tend to be more surrounded by negative terms
(1.06 and 0.96 negative words for every 10 words, and 2.04 and 1.76 for every 20 words)
than in documents related to capital or provisions. This is true even though credit scoring
documents have the lowest percentage of negative words out of total words, as shown in
Table 10. This is in line with our main analysis. The terms related to technological risks
and market conduct risks appear more frequently and with more negative sentiment in
documents related to credit scoring than in regulatory capital or provisions documents.
Second, there are fewer negative words around key terms in provisions documents
than in regulatory capital or credit scoring documents (except for statistical risk). This
effect is even more significant if we take into account that provisions documents are
those with the most negative terms overall, by a wide margin (Table 10). Again, this
supports our main exercise, in which we found that the mentions of risk terms for the
three categories were lower for provisions, suggesting that provisioning is the category
in which ML could has the lowest perceived risk. On the other hand, sentiment towards
statistical risk in regulatory capital documents is no worse than in credit rating or provi-
sions documents. This is at odds with our main exercise, in which we consider statistical
risk to be particularly relevant for regulatory capital. We leave the study of this result for
future research.
Table 8 Average number of negative terms in the 10 words surrounding the key terms
Statistics Technology Market conduct
Capital 0.79 0.59 0.78
Credit scoring 0.93 1.06 0.95
Provisions 0.89 0.42 0.75
Table 9 Average number of negative terms in the 20 words surrounding the key terms
Statistics Technology Market conduct
Capital 1.53 1.17 1.46
Credit scoring 1.85 2.04 1.76
Provisions 1.76 0.96 1.38
Table 10 Percentage of negative words over total
Percentage of negative
words over total words
Capital 3.87%
Credit scoring 3.09%
Provisions 4.88%Page 29 of 35 Alonso Robisco and Carbó Martínez ﻿FinancialInnovation (2022)8:70
Remaining figures
See Fig. 9 and Tables 11, 12 and 13.
-0.0100
-0.0050
0.0000
0.0050
0.0100
0.0150
0.0200
0.0250
0.0300
0.0350
0.0400
0.0450
0.0500
0.0550
Frequency of words
RegulatoryCapital
Cap_09_ECB Cap_01_trucharte
Cap_08_EBA_IRB Cap_03_BIS_Basel
Cap_10_BDE_prov Cap_04_BDE
Cap_12_EBA_LGD Cap_11_EBA_RTS
Cap_06_EBA_PdLgd Cap_02_BIS_Studies
Cap_05_EBA_2016 Cap_07_BIS_CRE
Average Capital
MarketConduct Statistics Techonology
-0.0050
0.0000
0.0050
0.0100
0.0150
0.0200
0.0250
0.0300
Frequency of words
CreditScoring
Cons_06_ECB_fintech_credit
Cons_02_EBA_automation
Cons_03_EBA_creditworthiness
Cons_01_EBA_loan_origination
Cons_04_EBA_final_report
Average Credit Scoring
MarketConduct Statistics Techonology
-0.0050
0.0000
0.0050
0.0100
0.0150
0.0200
0.0250
0.0300
Frequency of words
Provisioning
prov_01_deloitte
prov_08_EBA_accounting
prov_07_EBA_management
prov_02_ifrs_celex
prov_06_bde_provspru
Average Provisions
prov_04_bde
prov_05_deloitte_gx
prov_03_ifrs_pwc
MarketConduct Statistics Techonology
0.0000
0.0050
0.0100
0.0150
0.0200
0.0250
0.0300
0.0350
0.0400
0.0450
0.0500
0.0550
0.0600
0.0650
0.0700
0.0750
0.0800
0.0850
0.0900
0.0950
0.1000
0.1050
Frequency of words
Common Area comun_06_bankfrance
comun_09_eba_prudential
comun_05_eba_bigdata
comun_03_ethicguide
comun_08_eba_bigdata_2
Average Common
comun_01_iif_recommend
comun_11_iif_bias
Cons_05_EBA_innovative
comun_04_fsb
comun_07_ict
MarketConduct Statistics Techonology
Fig. 9 Calculation of regulatory requirements using NLP, for each model purposePage 30 of 35 Alonso Robisco and Carbó Martínez ﻿FinancialInnovation (2022)8:70
Table 11 Terminology for each model risk category
Statistics Technology Market conduct
Stability Transparency Privacy
Over-fitting Carbon footprint Auditability
Over-fit External providers Interpretability
Hyper parameters Dependencies Biases
Dynamic calibration Cyber-risk Expert judgement
Feature engineering Third-party Expert personnel
Forecast Cloud Human judgement
Parameters IT system Human-in-the-loop
Test Legacy Human-on-the-loop
Calibration Infrastructure Governance
Features Computing Ethics
Explanatory variables Computational power Ethical
AUC​ Deployment Human
ROC in-house Compliance
Recall Development Management
Prediction Pilot Explainability
Logit ICT Internal control
Algorithm Architecture Knowledge
Scenario Resilience Consumers
Data quality Security Consumer protection
Back-testing Operational risk Discrimination
Benchmarking Outsourcing risk Uncertainty
Model Reversibility Accountability
Optimisation DevOps Market abuse
Dimensionality Software Complexity
Validation Hosting Decision making
Metrics Cyber-risk Soundness
Structured Model stealing Conduct
Unstructured Poisoning attacks Internal audit
Semi-structured Adversarial attacks Fairness
Classification Open-source Fair
Tree-based Diversity
Neural network Oversight
Regression Simplicity
Clustering GDPR
Support vector machine Transparency
Reinforcement learning Traceability
Parametric Opaqueness
Non-parametric Black-box
Performance Black boxes
Prociclality Surrogates
Train Trust
Training Trustworthiness
Volatility Influence
Tuning SHAP
Threshold Shapley
Cross-validation Independent conditional
expectations
Compilation Partial dependence plots
Out-of-sample statistical ICE
Predictive PDP
Challenger model Complex
Correlation
Confidence levelPage 31 of 35 Alonso Robisco and Carbó Martínez ﻿FinancialInnovation (2022)8:70
Table 12 Set of regulatory texts analysed, classified by purpose of the model
Capital
"Credit Portfolios and Risk-Weighted Assets: Analysis of European Banks".Trucharte et al. (2015). Estabilidad
Financiera No 29. Banco de España
“Studies on theValidation of Internal Rating Systems”. BISWorking Paper No 14. Heitfield (2005)
“The Internal Ratings-Based Approach. Supporting document of the New Basel Accord”. BIS (2001)
“Implementation andValidation of Basel II Advanced Approaches in Spain”. Banco de España (2006)
“On the specification of the assessment methodology for competent authorities regarding compliance of an
institution with the requirements to use the IRB Approach in accordance with Articles 144(2), 173(3) and 180(3)
(b) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013”. EBA (2016a)
“Guidelines on PD estimation, LGD estimation and the treatment of defaulted exposures”. EBA (2017a)
“Calculation of RWA for credit risk”. BIS (2020)
“EBA Report on IRB modelling practices. Impact assessment for the GLs on PD, LGD and the treatment of
defaulted exposures based on the IRB survey results”. EBA (2017b)
“ECB Guide to internal models”. ECB (2019)
“Provisioning models vs Prudential models”. García Céspedes (2019)
“Discussion paper on draft regulatory technical standards on prudent valuation, under Article 100 of the draft
Capital Requirements Regulation (CRR)”. EBA (2013)
“Guidelines for the estimation of LGD appropriate for an economic downturn (‘Downturn LGD estimation’)”.
EBA (2019c)
Creditscoring
“Draft Guidelines on loan origination and monitoring”. EBA (2019b)
“Report on automation in financial advice”. European Supervisory Authorities (2016b)
“Guidelines on creditworthiness assessment”. EBA (2015)
“On the Decision of the European Banking Authority specifying the benchmark rate under Annex II to Directive
2014/17/EU (Mortgage Credit Directive)”. EBA (2016b)
“Report on innovative uses of consumer data by financial institutions”. EBA (2017c)
“Guide to assessments of fintech credit institution licence applications”. ECB (2018)
Provisioning
“Applying the expected credit loss model to trade receivables using a provision matrix”. Deloitte (2018)
“COMMISSION REGULATION (EU) 2016/2067 of 22 November 2016 amending Regulation (EC) No 1126/2008
adopting certain international accounting standards in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1606/2002 of the
European Parliament and of the Council as regards International Financial Reporting Standard 9”EC (2016)
“In depth IRFS 9 impairment: how to include multiple forward-looking scenarios”. PwC (2017)
“Financial Stability Consequences of the Expected Credit Loss Model in IFRS 9”. Sánchez Serrano (2018)
“The implementation of IFRS 9 impairment requirements by banks”Deloitte (2016)
“Provisioning models vs Prudential models”. García Céspedes (2019)
“Guidelines on management of non-performing and forborne exposures”. EBA (2018a)
“Guidelines on credit institutions’credit risk management practices and accounting for expected credit losses”.
EBA (2017d)
Commonarea
“IIF Machine Learning Recommendations for Policymakers”. IIF (2019a)
“Explainability in Predictive Modelling”. IIF (2018)
“Bias and Ethical Implications in Machine Learning”. IIF (2019b)
“Ethics Guidelines forTrustworthy AI”. High-Level Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence set up by the European
Commission (2019)
“Third-party dependencies in cloud services. Considerations on financial stability implications”. Financial Stabil-
ity Board (2019)
“Joint Committee Discussion Paper on the Use of Big Data by Financial Institutions”. European Supervisory
Authorities (2016a)
“Governance of Artificial Intelligence in Finance”. Dupont et al. (2020)
“Guidelines on ICT Risk Assessment under the Supervisory Review and Evaluation process (SREP)”. EBA (2017e)
“EBA Report on Big Data and Data Analytics”. EBA (2020)
“EBA Report on the Prudential Risks and Opportunities Arising for Institutions from Fintech”. EBA (2018b)Page 32 of 35 Alonso Robisco and Carbó Martínez ﻿FinancialInnovation (2022)8:70
Abbreviations
ML	Machine learning
IRB	Internal-ratings based
SHAP	 SHapley Additive exPlanations
NLP	 Natural Language Processing
PD	 Probability of default
CART​	 Classification and regression tree
AUC-ROC	 Area under the curve—receiver operating characteristic
TPR	 True positive rate
FPR	 False positive rate
LGD	 Loss given default
GPU	 Graphics Processing Unit
TPU	 Tensor Processing Unit
SSM	 Single supervisory mechanism
IASB	 International Accounting Standard Board
Acknowledgements
The authors appreciate the comments received from Ana Fernández, Sergio Gorjón, José Manuel Marqués, Carlos
Conesa, Juan Ayuso, CarolinaToloba and Arancha Gutiérrez, as well as the information shared by Supervision Depart-
ment IV of Banco de España and the suggestions and feedback received from colleagues attending two internal webi-
nars and from participants of the International Risk Management Conference 2021.
Author contributions
AA carried out the analysis of the current regulation in regulatory capital, credit scoring and provisions in order to
identify the risks associated with machine learning in those fields. AA also made the compilation of regulatory texts.
JMC carried out the empirical analyses, both those related to machine learning methods, as well as those correspond-
ing to interpretability of ML and natural language processing. Both (AA and JMC) conceived the design of the study,
the interpretation of the results, wrote the manuscript, and provided revisions to the manuscript. Both authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Declarations
Competing interests
We declare that we have no competing financial, professional or personal interests that might have influenced the
performance or presentation of the work described in the manuscript.The opinions and analyses in this paper are the
Table 13 Summary of papers on ML and credit default, by methodology used
Model Papers
Lasso Brown and Mues (2012)
Jones et al. (2015)
Cheng and Xiang (2017)
Guegan and Hassani (2018)
Moscato et al. (2021)
Tree Khandani et al. (2010)
Brown and Mues (2012)
Jones et al. (2015)
Guegan and Hassani (2018)
Random Forest Brown and Mues (2012)
Jones et al. (2015)
Moscatelli et al. (2020)
Moscato et al. (2021)
Boosting Brown and Mues (2012)
Jones et al. (2015)
Petropoulos et al. (2019)
Sigrist and Hirnschall (2019)
Butaru et al. (2016)
Neural network Brown and Mues (2012)
Babaev et al. (2019)
Petropoulos et al. (2019)
Kvamme et al. (2018)
Sirignano and Cont (2019)
Turiel and Aste (2019)
Albanesi andVamossy (2019)
Moscato et al. (2021)Page 33 of 35 Alonso Robisco and Carbó Martínez ﻿FinancialInnovation (2022)8:70
sole responsibility of the authors and, therefore, do not necessarily coincide with those of the Banco de España or the
Eurosystem.
Received: 16 June 2021 Accepted: 12 May 2022
References
Akinrolabu O, Nurse JR, Martin A, New S (2019) Cyber risk assessment in cloud provider environments: current models
and future needs. Comput Secur 87:101600
Albanesi S,Vamossy DF (2019) Predicting consumer default: a deep learning approach (No. w26165). National Bureau of
Economic Research
Aldasoro I, Gambacorta L, Giudici P, LeachT (2020) Operational and cyber risks in the financial sector
Alonso A, Carbó JM (2021) Understanding the performance of machine learning models to predict credit default: a novel
approach for supervisory evaluation
Alonso A, Marqués JM (2019) Financial innovation for a sustainable economy. Banco de España Occasional Paper
(1916)
Ariza-Garzón MJ, Arroyo J, Caparrini A, Segovia-Vargas MJ (2020) Explainability of a machine learning granting scor-
ing model in peer-to-peer lending. IEEE Access 8:64873–64890
Babaev D, Savchenko M, Tuzhilin A, Umerenkov D (2019) Et-rnn: applying deep learning to credit loan applications.
In: Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining,
pp 2183–2190
Babel B, Buehler K, Pivonka A, Richardson B, Waldron D (2019) Derisking machine learning and artificial intelligence.
McKinsey Quarterly, Business Technology Office
Banco de España (2006) Implantation and validation of Basel II advanced approaches in Spain. Paper presented at Bank-
ers Association’s regulatory compliance conference, Orlando, FL, 12 June
Bank of International Settlements (1996) Supervisory framework for the use of“back testing”in conjunction with the
internal models approach to market risk capital requirements
Bank of International Settlements (2001)The New Basel Capital Acord
Bank of International Settlements (2020) Calculation of RWA for credit risk
Barr B, Xu K, Silva C, Bertini E, Reilly R, Bruss CB,Wittenbach JD (2020)Towards ground truth explainability on tabular data
Barruetabeña E (2020) Impact of new technologies on financial inclusion. Banco De Espana Article 5:20
Bartlett R, Morse A, Stanton R,Wallace N (2022) Consumer-lending discrimination in the FinTech era. J Financial Econ
143(1):30–56
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (1996) Supervisory framework for the use of“back testing”in conjunction with
the internal models approach to market risk capital requirements
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2001)The internal ratings-based approach. Supporting document of the New
Basel Accord
Bazarbash M (2019) Fintech in financial inclusion: machine learning applications in assessing credit risk. International
Monetary Fund
Blei DM, Ng AY, Jordan MI (2003) Latent dirichlet allocation. J Mach Learn Res 3:993–1022
Bracke P, Datta A, Jung C, Sen S (2019) Machine learning explainability in finance: an application to default risk analysis
Breiman L (2001) Statistical modeling: the two cultures (with comments and a rejoinder by the author). Stat Sci
16(3):199–231
Brown I, Mues C (2012) An experimental comparison of classification algorithms for imbalanced credit scoring data sets.
Expert Syst Appl 39(3):3446–3453
Butaru F, Chen Q, Clark B, Das S, Lo AW, Siddique A (2016) Risk and risk management in the credit card industry. J Bank
Finance 72:218–239
CDP (2020)The time to green finance. CDP Financial Services Disclosure Report 2020
Chen H, XiangY (2017)The study of credit scoring model based on group lasso. Procedia Comput Sci 122:677–684
Deloitte (2016)The implementation of IFRS 9 impairment requirements by banks
Deloitte (2018) Applying the expected credit loss model to trade receivables using a provision matrix
DobbieW, Liberman A, Paravisini D, PathaniaV (2021) Measuring bias in consumer lending. Rev Econ Stud
88(6):2799–2832
Dupont L, Fliche O,Yang S (2020) Governance of artificial intelligence in finance. Banque De France
European Banking Authority (2013) Discussion paper on draft regulatory technical standards on prudent valuation,
under Article 100 of the draft Capital Requirements Regulation (CRR)
European Banking Authority (2015) Guidelines on creditworthiness assessment
European Banking Authority (2016a) RTS on the specification of the assessment methodology for competent authorities
regarding compliance of an institution with the requirements to use the IRB Approach in accordance with Articles
144(2), 173(3) and 180(3)(b) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013
European Banking Authority (2016b) On the Decision of the European Banking Authority specifying the benchmark rate
under Annex II to Directive 2014/17/EU (Mortgage Credit Directive)
European Banking Authority (2017a) Guidelines on PD estimation, LGD estimation and the treatment of defaulted
exposures
European Banking Authority (2017b) Report on IRB modelling practices. Impact assessment for the GLs on PD, LGD and
the treatment of defaulted exposures based on the IRB survey results
European Banking Authority (2017c) Report on innovative uses of consumer data by financial institutionsPage 34 of 35 Alonso Robisco and Carbó Martínez ﻿FinancialInnovation (2022)8:70
European Banking Authority (2017d) Guidelines on credit institutions’credit risk management practices and accounting
for expected credit losses
European Banking Authority (2017e) Guidelines on ICT Risk Assessment under the Supervisory Review and Evaluation
process (SREP)
European Banking Authority (2018a) Guidelines on management of non-performing and forborne exposures
European Banking Authority (2018b) Report on the prudential risks and opportunities arising for Institutions from Fintech
European Banking Authority (2019a) Progress Report on the IRB Roadmap
European Banking Authority (2019b) Draft Guidelines on loan origination and monitoring
European Banking Authority (2019c) Guidelines for the estimation of LGD appropriate for an economic downturn
(‘Downturn LGD estimation’)
European Banking Authority (2020) Report on Big Data and Advanced Analytics
European Central Bank (2018) Guide to assessment of fintech credit institution license applications
European Central Bank (2019) ECB guide to internal models
European Comission (2016) COMMISSION REGULATION (EU) 2016/2067 of 22 November 2016 amending Regulation
(EC) No 1126/2008 adopting certain international accounting standards in accordance with Regulation (EC) No
1606/2002 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards International Financial Reporting Standard 9
European Commission (2019) Ethics guidelines for trustworthy AI. High-level expert group on artificial intelligence
European Commission (2021) Proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down
harmonised rules on artificial intelligence (artificial intelligence act). COM/ 2021/ 206
European Supervisory Authorities (2016a) Joint Committee Discussion Paper on the use of Big Data by Financial
Institutions
European Supervisory Authorities (2016b) Report on automation in financial advice
FarkasW, Fringuellotti F,Tunaru R (2020) A cost-benefit analysis of capital requirements adjusted for model risk. J Corp
Finan 65:101753
Financial Stability Board (2019)Third-party dependencies in cloud services. Considerations on financial stability
implications
Fisher A, Rudin C, Dominici F (2019) All models are wrong, but many are useful: learning a variable’s importance by study-
ing an entire class of prediction models simultaneously. J Mach Learn Res 20(177):1–81
Frye C, Rowat C, Feige I (2019) Asymmetric shapley values: incorporating causal knowledge into model-agnostic explain-
ability. arXiv preprint arXiv:​1910.​06358
Fuster A, Goldsmith-Pinkham P, RamadoraiT,Walther A (2022) Predictably unequal?The effects of machine learning on
credit markets. J Financ 77(1):5–47
García Céspedes JC (2019) Provisioning Models vs. Prudential Models. Revista de estabilidad financiera. Nº 36 (primavera
2019), p 125–146
Gu S, Kelly B, Xiu D (2020) Empirical asset pricing via machine learning. Rev Financ Stud 33(5):2223–2273
Guegan D, Hassani B (2018) Regulatory learning: How to supervise machine learning models? An application to credit
scoring. J Finance Data Sci 4(3):157–171
Hall P, Cox B, Dickerson S, Ravi Kannan A, Kulkarni R, Schmidt N (2021) A United States fair lending perspective on
machine learning. Front Artif Intell 4:78
Heitfield H (2005) Studies on the validation of internal rating systems.Working paper 14. Basel Committee on Banking
Supervision
HeskesT, Sijben E, Bucur IG, ClaassenT (2020) Causal shapley values: exploiting causal knowledge to explain individual
predictions of complex models. arXiv preprint arXiv:​2011.​01625
Hu M, Liu B (2004) Mining and summarizing customer reviews. In: Proceedings of the tenth ACM SIGKDD international
conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp 168–177)
HuangY, Zhang L, Li Z, Qiu H, SunT,Wang X (2020) Fintech credit risk assessment for SMEs: evidence from China
Institute of International Finance (2018) Explainability in predictive modelling
Institute of International Finance (2019a) Machine learning in credit risk
Institute of International Finance (2019b) Machine learning: recommendations for policymakers
Institute of International Finance (2019c) Bias and ethical implications in machine learning
Institute of International Finance (2020) Machine learning governance
Jagtiani J, Lemieux C (2019)The roles of alternative data and machine learning in fintech lending: evidence from the
LendingClub consumer platform. Financ Manage 48(4):1009–1029
Jones S, Johnstone D,Wilson R (2015) An empirical evaluation of the performance of binary classifiers in the prediction of
credit ratings changes. J Bank Finance 56:72–85
Jung C, Mueller H, Pedemonte S, Plances S,Thew O (2019) Machine learning in UK financial services. Bank of England and
Financial Conduct Authority
Kerkhof J, Melenberg B, Schumacher H (2010) Model risk and capital reserves. J Bank Finance 34(1):267–279
Khandani AE, Kim AJ, Lo AW (2010) Consumer credit-risk models via machine-learning algorithms. J Banking Finance
34(11):2767–2787
Kou G, PengY,Wang G (2014) Evaluation of clustering algorithms for financial risk analysis using MCDM methods. Inf Sci
275:1–12
Kou G, XuY, PengY, Shen F, ChenY, Chang K, Kou S (2021a) Bankruptcy prediction for SMEs using transactional data and
two-stage multiobjective feature selection. Decisi Support Syst 140:113429
Kou G, Olgu Akdeniz Ö, Dinçer H,Yüksel S (2021b) Fintech investments in European banks: a hybrid IT2 fuzzy multidimen-
sional decision-making approach
Königstorfer F,Thalmann S (2020) Applications of Artificial Intelligence in commercial banks–A research agenda for
behavioral finance. J Behav Experiment Finance 27:100352
KvammeH,SellereiteN,AasK,SjursenS(2018)Predictingmortgagedefaultusingconvolutionalneuralnetworks.ExpertSyst
Appl102:207–217Page 35 of 35 Alonso Robisco and Carbó Martínez ﻿FinancialInnovation (2022)8:70
LiT, Kou G, PengY, Philip SY (2021) An integrated cluster detection, optimization, and interpretation approach for finan-
cial data. IEEETransactions on Cybernetics
Liu B (2010) Sentiment analysis and subjectivity. Handb Nat Lang Process 2(2010):627–666
Lundberg SM, Lee SI (2017) A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. In: Advances in neural information
processing systems, pp 4765–4774
Lundberg SM, Erion G, Chen H, DeGrave A, Prutkin JM, Nair B, Lee SI (2020) From local explanations to global understand-
ing with explainable AI for trees. Nat Mach Intell 2(1):56–67
LynnT, Mooney JG, Rosati P, Cummins M (2019) Disrupting finance: FinTech and strategy in the 21st century. Springer
Nature, p 175
Masciandaro D, Peia O, Romelli D (2020) Banking supervision and external auditors: theory and empirics. J Financ Stab
46:100722
Mittelstadt B, Russell C,Wachter S (2019) Explaining explanations in AI. In: Proceedings of the conference on fairness,
accountability, and transparency, pp 279–288
Molnar C (2019) Interpretable machine learning: a guide for making black box models explainable (published online)
Moreno ÁI, CamineroT (2020) Application of text mining to the analysis of climate-related disclosures
Moscatelli M, Parlapiano F, Narizzano S,Viggiano G (2020) Corporate default forecasting with machine learning. Expert
Syst Appl 161:113567
MoscatoV, Picariello A, Sperlí G (2021) A benchmark of machine learning approaches for credit score prediction. Expert
Syst Appl 165:113986
Petropoulos A, SiakoulisV, Stavroulakis E, Klamargias A (2019) A robust machine learning approach for credit risk analysis
of large loan level datasets using deep learning and extreme gradient boosting. IFC Bulletins chapters, 49
PwC (2017) In depth IRFS 9 impairment: how to include multiple forward-looking scenarios
Ribeiro MT, Singh S, Guestrin C (2016) "Why should i trust you?" Explaining the predictions of any classifier. In: Proceed-
ings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp 1135–1144
Rudin C (2019) Stop explaining black box machine learning models for high stakes decisions and use interpretable
models instead. Nat Mach Intell 1(5):206–215
Sánchez Serrano A (2018) Financial stability consequences of the expected credit loss model in IFRS 9. Financial Stability
Review
Sarica S, Song B, Low E, Luo J (2019) Engineering knowledge graph for keyword discovery in patent search. In: Proceed-
ings of the design society: international conference on engineering design, vol 1, no 1, Cambridge University
Press, pp 2249–2258
Sarlin P (2013) On policymakers’loss functions and the evaluation of early warning systems. Econ Lett 119(1):1–7
Sigrist F, Hirnschall C (2019) Grabit: Gradient tree-boostedTobit models for default prediction. J Bank Finance
102:177–192
Sirignano J, Cont R (2019) Universal features of price formation in financial markets: perspectives from deep learning.
Quant Finance 19(9):1449–1459
Slack D, Hilgard S, Jia E, Singh S, Lakkaraju H (2020) Fooling lime and shap: adversarial attacks on post hoc explanation
methods. In: Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, pp 180–186
Smith A (2020) Using artificial intelligence and algorithms. US FederalTrade Commission, FTC Business Blog, April. https://​
www.​ftc.​gov/​news-​events/​blogs/​busin​ess-​blog/​2020/​04/​using-​artif​i cial-​intel​ligen​ce-​algor​ithms
Strubell E, Ganesh A, McCallum A (2019) Energy and policy considerations for deep learning in NLP. arXiv preprint arXiv:​
1906.​02243
Tarashev N (2010) Measuring portfolio credit risk correctly: why parameter uncertainty matters. J Bank Finance
34(9):2065–2076
Trucharte Artigas C, Pérez Montes C, Cristófoli ME, Ferrer Pérez A, Lavín San Segundo N (2015) Credit portfolios and risk
weighted assets: analysis of European banks. Estabilidad financiera. No 29 (noviembre 2015), pp 63–85
Turiel JD, AsteT (2019) P2P Loan acceptance and default prediction with artificial intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:​1907.​
01800
Unceta I, Nin J, Pujol O (2020) Copying machine learning classifiers. IEEE Access 8:160268–160284
VapnikVN, Chervonenkis AY (2015) On the uniform convergence of relative frequencies of events to their probabilities.
In: Measures of complexity, Springer, Cham, pp 11–30
Wachter S, Mittelstadt B, Russell C (2017) Counterfactual explanations without opening the black box: automated deci-
sions and the GDPR. Harv JLTech 31:841
Wall LD (2018) Some financial regulatory implications of artificial intelligence. J Econ Bus 100:55–63
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.