Implications of Heightened Global Uncertainty for the East Asia and Paciﬁc Region
July 04, 2024
No. 64
Jongrim Ha, Ergys Islamaj, and Aaditya Mattoo1
Macroeconomic, ﬁnancial, and policy-related uncertainty have increased since the COVID-19 pandemic globally and in individual
developing economies in the East Asia and Paciﬁc region. Uncertainty shocks can transmit across borders and their economic
consequence is quite sizeable, aﬀecting both the ﬁnancial sector and the real economy in the EAP region.
Introduction
Extensive literature documents heightened economic
uncertainty since the COVID-19 pandemic (Cascaldi-Garcia et
al. 2023). All types of uncertainty have increased:
macroeconomic, ﬁnancial, economic policy, geopolitical, and
trade uncertainty. However, less is known about the
implications of global uncertainty for emerging markets and
developing economies (EMDEs) in the East Asia and Paciﬁc
(EAP) region. This Research and Policy Brief examines the
eﬀects of global uncertainty on EAP by addressing the following
questions. First, what are the basic sources of economic
uncertainty? Second, how has uncertainty evolved globally and
in individual EAP EMDEs in recent decades? Third, how has
global uncertainty aﬀected macroeconomic and ﬁnancial
conditions in EAP?
The empirical results suggest that the eﬀects of
uncertainty—mainly related to the volatility (second moment)
of the variables—are distinctive from the eﬀects of the level
(ﬁrst moment) ﬂuctuations in underlying business, ﬁnancial,
and policy variables. The economic consequences of the
uncertainty shocks are quite sizeable, almost comparable to
the eﬀects of the “level” shocks. In addition, the results suggest
that diﬀerent types of uncertainty shocks aﬀect EAP countries
diﬀerently, individually and as a group cause somewhat
heterogeneous eﬀects on EAP countries. In terms of cumulative
eﬀect, macro uncertainty, followed by ﬁnancial and economic
policy uncertainty, contributes the most to the variations in the
key domestic variables in EAP. In particular, macro uncertainty
can explain up to one-quarter of variations in macro variables in
EAP.
Evolution of global and EAP economic uncertainty
Global economic uncertainty rose sharply to a record-high level
after the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic and stayed
elevated through 2023 and early 2024.This Brief discusses
the eﬀect of global uncertainty on macroeconomic and
ﬁnancial conditions in the EAP. It highlights three types of
uncertainty: macroeconomic uncertainty–forecast-based measures;
policy uncertainty–news-based measures; and ﬁnancial
uncertainty–stock market volatility-based measures. Where a
global index is unavailable, US uncertainty indexes are used as
proxies for global uncertainty, as is common in the literature.
1
Aﬃliations: Aaditya Mattoo is the Chief Economist of East Asia Paciﬁc, World Bank. Jongrim Ha is with the Prospects Group (DECPG), World Bank. Ergys Islamaj is with the East
Asia and Paciﬁc Chief Economist Oﬃce, World Bank.
Acknowledgements: Nancy Morrison provided editorial assistance.
Objective and disclaimer: Research & Policy Briefs synthetize existing research and data to shed light on a useful and interesting question for policy debate. Research & Policy Briefs
carry the names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The ﬁndings, interpretations, and conclusions are entirely those of the authors. They do not necessarily represent
the views of the World Bank Group, its Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.
Research & Policy Briefs
From the World Bank Malaysia Hub
Box 1 presents more details about the measurement of
diﬀerent types of uncertainty.
Macroeconomic uncertainty is elevated in the United
States, reﬂecting uncertain future output growth and inﬂation
developments (ﬁgure 1, panel a). After peaking in April 2020 at
the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, it spiked again in 2022,
mainly due to a surge in inﬂation. Despite the decline since
mid-2022, inﬂation uncertainty is still high in the United States,
reﬂecting disagreements on the speed and degree of the future
(dis)inﬂation process. Global economic policy uncertainty,
which aggregates future monetary, ﬁscal, and ﬁnancial policies,
is twice as high as the pre-pandemic levels (ﬁgure 1, panel b). In
the United States, debates continue about the path of future
monetary policy decisions by the Federal Reserve; the
monetary policy uncertainty index has stayed persistently
above the long-term averages since 2020. Similarly, ﬁnancial
uncertainty (VIX) surged in 2020 and 2022 and, despite
declines, remains above pre-pandemic levels (ﬁgure 1, panel c).
Uncertainty regarding future output, inﬂation, ﬁnancial
markets, and economic policies is higher than before the
pandemic in many EAP countries. Macro uncertainty, which
suﬀered from record-high levels in 2020–21 (output uncertainty)
or 2022 (inﬂation uncertainty), has generally declined since
2023 (ﬁgure 2). That said, uncertainty measures are at levels
above pre-pandemic ones, and in some countries (Thailand),
output and inﬂation uncertainty are still increasing. News-based
economic policy uncertainty remains elevated—particularly in
China. Survey-based uncertainty indicators on short- and
long-term interest rates, which are typically a critical
determinant of investment, have increased across all EAP
economies (World Bank 2023).
Economic eﬀects of heightened uncertainty
To assess the eﬀects of global uncertainty on EAP, a series of
structural vector autoregressive (SVAR) models are estimated
over 2000–19 for ﬁve EAP countries: China, Indonesia,
Malaysia, the Philippines, and Thailand. The models consist of a
set of macro and ﬁnancial variables in the United States (or
global measures), China, and individual EAP countries. China,
the largest EMDE, is taken separately in the model to reﬂect its
role as both a source and a recipient of global uncertainty
shocks. Three sources of uncertainty are distinguished:
Public
Disclosure
Authorized
Public
Disclosure
Authorized
Public
Disclosure
Authorized
Public
Disclosure
Authorized
Model. Both country-speciﬁc and panel SVAR models are run.
Country models provide more detailed county-speciﬁc results,
while the panel model is more eﬃcient and clearer to present but
loses country-speciﬁc results. This Brief reports the results based
on panel SVARs. Country-speciﬁc results are featured as
robustness or sensitivity checks. In identifying the uncertainty
shocks, the Brief employs recursive restriction. Following the
previous literature—such as Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016); Leduc
and Lui (2016)—and to overcome the endogeneity problem, the
uncertainty measures are ordered last (along with various control
variables to reduce the endogeneity).
Data set. The analyses are based on monthly macroeconomic and
ﬁnancial data for the global analysis, US analysis, and analysis of
EAP countries in a panel setup. Where a global index is
unavailable, US uncertainty indexes are used as proxies for global
uncertainty, in keeping with the literature. The sample period is
2000–19. Main endogenous variables (in this order) are: US
(global) output, inﬂation, uncertainty measure, domestic output,
inﬂation, exchange rates, equity prices, and domestic uncertainty
measure. Control variables are: volatility (VIX) index, US monetary
policy instrument, time trends, and commodity prices. EAP
countries in the sample include China, Indonesia, Malaysia, the
Philippines, and Thailand. These countries were selected after
considering the economic scale and the availability of uncertainty
data. China, which is the largest emerging market and developing
economy (EMDE), is taken separately in a model that includes both
global (US) and Chinese variables. Three types of uncertainty
measures are tested: macroeconomic, ﬁnancial, and policy. For
China’s uncertainty measures, the dataset in Ahir et al. (2022) is
also employed.
Robustness checks. The main empirical results are tested using
alternative modeling [factor-augmented vector autoregressive
(FAVAR) framework], alternative measures of uncertainty,
diﬀerent ordering of the variables, the inclusion of other control
variables—in particular, the diﬀerent types of uncertainty measures
and the inclusion of post-pandemic data, among others. The
results conﬁrm that the key empirical results are robust to these
alternative models.
2
Implications of Heightened Global Uncertainty
for the East Asia and Paciﬁc Region
Figure 1. Evolution of uncertainty in the global economy and the United States
Source: World Bank estimates; Haver Analytics; Baker, Bloom, and Davis 2016; Jurado, Ludvigson, and Ng 2015.
Note: In panel a, macroeconomic uncertainty is based on forecast-based measures by Jurado, Ludvigson, and Ng (2015). The long-term average is 0.9. GDP and inﬂation
uncertainty are based on a standard deviation of Consensus Forecasts for US GDP and Consumer Price Index (CPI) inﬂation. In panel b, the Global Economic Policy Uncertainty
(EPU) and US Monetary Policy Uncertainty (MPU) index are based on news-based measures by Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016). In panels b and c, the horizontal lines indicate
the long-term average (set to 100). RHS = right-hand side.
a. US macroeconomic uncertainty b. Global economic policy uncertainty
and US monetary policy uncertainty
c. US ﬁnancial uncertainty (VIX)
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
2000 2005 2010 2015 2020
Macro uncertainly
GDP uncertainty (RHS)
Inﬂation uncertainty (RHS)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
2000 2005 2010 2015 2020
Global EPU US MPU (RHS)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
2000 2005 2010 2015 2020
Box 1. Empirical methodology and data
This Research and Policy Brief takes two sequential empirical
steps: (1) measuring uncertainty; and (2) estimating SVAR models
to quantify the economic eﬀects of global uncertainty on EAP.
Measures of uncertainty
The Brief employs various measures of uncertainty based on the
extensive literature and authors’ calculations.
• Forecast-based measures. To gauge macroeconomic uncertainty,
this set of measures relies on economic forecasting models for
a variable of interest. For instance, a vector autoregressive
(VAR) model is recursively estimated, and the standard
deviation of the forecast error for the variable of interest is
assumed to reﬂect the uncertainty in the variable.
• Survey-based measures. This set of measures uses economic
surveys from professional forecasters on a variable of interest:
output, inﬂation, short- and long-term interest rates, and
current account. The uncertainty is measured as the survey
responses' standard deviation or cross-sectional diﬀerences,
such as inter-quartile ranges.
• News-based measures. To gauge policy uncertainty, this set of
measures uses a keyword-searching algorithm. An example is
the algorithm used by Baker et al. (2016) and Husted et al.
(2020), which puts together economic policy uncertainty in the
United States and other economies by searching the keywords
for momentary, ﬁscal, and other policies in the local newspapers.
Structural vector autoregressive (SVAR) models
An open-economy model characterizes the data-generating process
as follows:
Yt is an n×1 vector of endogenous macroeconomic and ﬁnancial
variables. Xt is exogenous regressors. A, Bi ( i ≥ 1), and Cj ( j ≥ 0)
are nonsingular coeﬃcient matrices. εt is an n×1 structural
disturbances vector and serially uncorrelated.
A A
AYt=∑i=1 Bi Yt-i +∑j=0 Cj Xt-j +εt .
p q
impacts on key domestic ﬁnancial variables in EAP, although
their impacts are overall more immediate but short-lived
compared with macro uncertainty (ﬁgure 3, panel c). Following
a one- standard-deviation VIX shock, average stock prices in
EAP declined by 1.2 percent, which is comparable to the eﬀects
of a negative shock on US equity prices (-1.6 percent). The
eﬀects of policy uncertainty shocks appear to add another layer
of negative eﬀects on EAP countries. While US monetary
tightening led to a decline in EAP stock prices by up to 1.4
percent, heightened US monetary policy uncertainty resulted
in another 0.7 percent decline in stock prices.
The sizeable uncertainty eﬀects reﬂect various channels of
international transmission of uncertainty shocks. First of all, the
dynamic responses of the macro variables are consistent with
the theories on the economic eﬀects of uncertainty—typically
macroeconomic, ﬁnancial, and policy (for estimation details,
see box 1).
The ﬁndings suggest that global uncertainty shocks have
negatively aﬀected macro and ﬁnancial conditions in EAP
countries. This result is statistically and economically signiﬁcant
based on average results (that is, based on the panel
model), as well as in country-speciﬁc perspectives—the
results hold for all EAP countries in the sample. Following a
one-standard-deviation increase in US macro uncertainty,
growth of output declined by 0.5 percent and stock prices
declined by 3.0 percent in EAP within one year after the shock
(ﬁgure 3, panels a and b). The eﬀects are stronger than the
eﬀects from a one-standard-deviation decline in US output (by
0.3 percent and 1.0 percent, respectively). Global ﬁnancial
market and economic policy uncertainty also had signiﬁcant
Research & Policy Brief No.64
3
Figure 2. Evolution of economic uncertainty in the East Asia and Paciﬁc region
Source: World Bank estimates; Consensus Economics; Baker, Bloom, and Davis 2016.
Note: In panel a, EAP macroeconomic uncertainty is based on the average cross-sectional standard deviation of Consensus Forecast surveys for four emerging markets and
developing economies (EMDEs) in EAP (China, Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand). In panel b, China policy uncertainty is based on news-based measures by Baker et al. (2016). EAP
ﬁnancial uncertainty is based on the average standard deviation of Consensus Forecasts for 3-month Treasury bill yields and 10-year bond yields in the four EAP countries. EAP
= East Asia and Paciﬁc; RHS = right-hand side.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
2000 2005 2010 2015 2020
GDP uncertainty
Inﬂation uncertainly
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
2000 2005 2010 2015 2020
China policy uncertainty
EAP long-term rate uncertainty (RHS)
EAP short-term rate uncertainty (RHS)
a. Macroeconomic uncertainty b. Financial and policy uncertainty
Figure 3. Impact of US uncertainty on the East Asia and Paciﬁc region
Source: World Bank estimates; Jarocińksy and Karadi 2020.
Note: The results are based on panel vector autoregressions estimated with a sample for January 2000 through December 2019 for the United States and four emerging
markets and developing economies (EMDEs) in EAP (Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand). The model includes, in this order, the following measures: the US production,
US Consumer Price Index (CPI), US uncertainty; and domestic (EAP) industrial production, prices, stock prices, exchange rates, and uncertainty. Panel a shows dynamic
responses of EAP industrial production to a one-standard-deviation increase in macroeconomic uncertainty and decline in output. Bars indicate the median responses, and
vertical lines indicate 16 percent–84 percent conﬁdence intervals. Panel b shows dynamic responses of EAP equity prices to a one-standard-deviation increase in ﬁnancial
uncertainty (VIX) and decline in US equity prices. Panel c shows dynamic responses of EAP stock prices to US monetary policy tightening shock and US monetary policy
uncertainty shock. EAP = East Asia and Paciﬁc.
a. EAP output responses to negative US
output and macro uncertainty shocks
b. EAP stock price responses to
negative US stock price and
ﬁnancial uncertainty shocks
c. EAP stock price responses to US
monetary policy tightening and
monetary policy uncertainty shocks
Percent
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
t=0 6 12 24 t=0 6 12 24
US monetary policy
shock
US monetary policy
uncertainty shock
-1.0
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
t=0 6 12 24 t=0 6 12 24
Percent
Negative US
output shock
Marco uncertainly
shock
Percent
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
t=0 6 12 24 t=0 6 12 24
Negative US
stock prices
US ﬁnancial
uncertainty (VIX)
4
Implications of Heightened Global Uncertainty
for the East Asia and Paciﬁc Region
on the “wait-and-see” channel that strains private investment
and consumption (Binder 2017; Bloom 2009). In particular, high
levels of macro uncertainty have a negative impact on
investment growth, as investors become hesitant to invest in
new projects or expand their existing businesses (Leduc and Liu
2016). Second, the reactions of ﬁnancial asset prices and
increases in credit costs also contribute to the contractionary
eﬀects of economic uncertainty. Third, following the
heightened global and US uncertainty, the uncertainty
indicators in individual EAP countries also responded
signiﬁcantly, which supports the narratives of internationally
correlated risk and uncertainty (Londono et al. 2021).
The heightened uncertainty in the domestic economy
is estimated to have played a negative role in economic
conﬁdence/sentiments in EAP countries (Ha and So 2023).
Estimation results also suggest that while China was
negatively aﬀected by the global and US uncertainty shocks, its
own uncertainty shocks had an impact on the macroeconomic
and ﬁnancial conditions in EAP (ﬁgure 4). Following a
one-standard-deviation increase in macro uncertainty in China,
industrial production in EAP countries declined by around 0.3
percent—about half of the responses to the same type of US
uncertainty. Again, China's heightened policy uncertainty was
followed by heightened uncertainty in EAP countries. These
results collectively suggest that China is both a source and
recipient of uncertainty shocks in the global markets,
particularly in connection with EAP countries.
Conclusion
The ﬁndings lead to at least two types of novel implications.
First, the eﬀects of uncertainty—which is mainly related to the
volatility (second moment) of the variables—are distinctive
from the eﬀects of the level (ﬁrst moment) ﬂuctuations in
underlying business, ﬁnancial, and policy variables. The
economic consequence of the uncertainty shocks is quite
sizeable, almost comparable to the eﬀects of the “level”
shocks. These ﬁndings are quite robust across diﬀerent types of
uncertainty measures—speciﬁcally, across macro, ﬁnancial,
and policy uncertainties. Second, the results suggest that
diﬀerent types of uncertainty shocks aﬀect EAP countries
diﬀerently, individually and as a group. In terms of cumulative
eﬀect, macro uncertainty, followed by ﬁnancial and economic
policy uncertainty, contributes the most to the variations in the
key domestic variables in EAP. In particular, macro uncertainty,
which explains up to 40 percent of total variations in US output
and prices, can explain up to one-quarter of variations in macro
variables in EAP. This result is in line with the ﬁndings of Stock
and Watson (2012), who argue that the global uncertainty
shock has been a key driver of global recessions and other
severe ﬂuctuations.
References
Ahir, H., N. Bloom, and D. Furceri. 2022. “The World Uncertainty Index.” NBER Working Paper 29763,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Baker, S. R., N. Bloom, and S. J. Davis. 2016. “Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 131 (4): 1593–1636.
Binder, C. C. 2017. “Measuring Uncertainty Based on Rounding: New Method and Application to Inﬂation
Expectations.” Journal of Monetary Economics 90 (October): 1–12.
Bloom, N. 2009. “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks.” Econometrica 77 (3): 623–85.
Cascaldi-Garcia, D., C. Sarisoy, J. M. Londono, B. Sun, D. D. Datta, T. Ferreira, O. Grishchenko, M. R.
Jahan-Parvar, F. Loria, S. Ma, M. Rodriguez, I. Zer, and J. Rogers. 2023. "What Is Certain about
Uncertainty?" Journal of Economic Literature 61 (2): 624–54.
Ha, J., and I. So. 2023. “Global Conﬁdence, Uncertainty, and Business Cycles. Uncertainty, and Business
Cycles.” International Journal of Central Banking 19 (1): 451–95.
Husted, L., J. Rogers, and B. Sun. 2020. “Monetary Policy Uncertainty.” Journal of Monetary Economics 115: 20–36.
Jarociński, M., and P. Karadi. 2020. “Deconstructing Monetary Policy Surprises—The Role of Information
Shocks.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 12 (2): 1–43.
Jurado, K., S. C. Ludvigson, and S. Ng. 2015. “Measuring Uncertainty.” American Economic Review 105 (3):
1177–1216.
Leduc, S., and Z. Liu. 2016. “Uncertainty Shocks Are Aggregate Demand Shocks.” Journal of Monetary
Economics 82 (September): 20–35.
Londono, J. M., S. Ma, and B. A. Wilson. 2021. “The Global Transmission of Real Economic Uncertainty.”
International Finance Discussion Paper 1317, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
Washington, DC.
Stock, J. H., and M. W. Watson. 2012. “Disentangling the Channels of the 2007–2009 Recession.” NBER
Working Paper 18094, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
World Bank. 2023. “World Bank East Asia and Paciﬁc Economic Update, April 2023: Services for
Development.” Washington, DC: World Bank.
Figure 4. Impact of United States and China uncertainty on the East Asia and Paciﬁc region
Source: World Bank estimates.
Note: The results are based on a panel Vector autoregression estimated for January 2000 through December 2019 for four emerging markets and developing economies
(EMDEs) in EAP (Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand). The model includes, in this order, the US production, US Consumer Price Index (CPI), US uncertainty measure; China
production, China CPI, China uncertainty measure; and domestic (EAP) industrial production, prices, stock prices, exchange rates, and uncertainty measures. In panel a, bars
show dynamic responses of China industrial production and CPI to a one-standard-deviation increase in macroeconomic uncertainty in the United States. In panel b, bars show
dynamic responses of EAP production to a one-standard-deviation increase in macroeconomic uncertainty in the United States and China. EAP = East Asia and Paciﬁc.
a. China output and stock price responses to
heightened macro uncertainty in the
United States
b. EAP responses to heightened uncertainty
in China
-1.0
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0.0
0.2
t=0 6 12 24 t=0 6 12 24
Industrial production CPI inﬂation
Percent
EAP output to
China macro
uncertainly
EAP prices to
China macro
uncertainly
t=0 6 12 24 t=0 6 12 24
-0.7
-0.6
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Percent
