Citation: Dou, X.; Qian, M.; Zhao, X.;
Wang, A.; Lei, Z.; Guo, E.; Chen, Y.
Fluid Flow Behavior in
Nanometer-Scale Pores and Its Impact
on Shale Oil Recovery Efficiency.
Energies 2024, 17, 4677. https://
doi.org/10.3390/en17184677
Academic Editor: Manoj Khandelwal
Received: 16 August 2024
Revised: 9 September 2024
Accepted: 15 September 2024
Published: 20 September 2024
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
energies
Article
Fluid Flow Behavior in Nanometer-Scale Pores and Its Impact on
Shale Oil Recovery Efficiency
Xiangji Dou 1, Menxing Qian 1, Xinli Zhao 1,* , An Wang 1, Zhengdong Lei 2, Erpeng Guo 2 and Yufei Chen 1
1 School of Petroleum and Natural Gas Engineering, Changzhou University, Changzhou 213164, China;
anwang116@163.com (A.W.)
2 Research Institute of Petroleum Exploration & Development, PetroChina Company Limited,
Beijing 100083, China
* Correspondence: ucaszxl@163.com
Abstract: Shale oil reservoirs, as an unconventional hydrocarbon resource, have the potential to sub-
stitute conventional hydrocarbon resources and alleviate energy shortages, making their exploration
and development critically significant. However, due to the low permeability and the development
of nanopores in shale reservoirs, shale oil production is challenging and recovery efficiency is low.
During the imbibition stage, fracturing fluid displaces the oil in the pores primarily under capillary
forces, but the complex pore structure of shale reservoirs makes the imbibition mechanism unclear.
This research studies the imbibition flow mechanism in nanopores based on the capillary force model
and two-phase flow theory, coupled with numerical simulation methods. The results indicated
that within a nanopore diameter range of 10–20 nm, increasing the pore diameter leads to a higher
imbibition displacement volume. Increased pressure can enhance the imbibition displacement, but
the effect diminishes gradually. Under the water-wet conditions, the imbibition displacement volume
increases as the contact angle decreases. When the oil phase viscosity decreases from 10 mPa·s to
1 mPa·s, the imbibition displacement rate can increase by 72%. Moreover, merely increasing the water
phase viscosity results in only a 5% increase in the imbibition displacement rate. The results provide
new insights into the imbibition flow mechanism in nanopores within shale oil reservoirs and offer a
theoretical foundation and technical support for efficient shale oil development.
Keywords: shale oil; single nanopore; capillary force; imbibition displacement; multifactor analysis
1. Introduction
As conventional oil and gas resources diminish and global oil demand increases,
the focus has shifted to developing unconventional hydrocarbon resources. Shale oil,
as one such resource, offers the potential to alleviate oil shortages through intensified
exploration and development efforts. In China, shale oil resources are widely distributed,
with estimated reserves exceeding 100 billion tons, indicating significant exploration and
development potential [1]. However, shale oil reservoirs exhibit strong heterogeneity, with
storage spaces primarily comprising micro- and nanopores, which complicates production
and results in low recovery rates [2]. Imbibition displacement is a key technology for
efficientdevelopmentofsuchlow-gradeoilreservoirs. Moreover, theimbibitionmechanism
between fracturing fluid and crude oil remains unclear. Hence, understanding fluid flow in
nanopores is crucial for enhancing shale oil recovery [3–6].
Shale oil reservoirs contain significant organic matter, and most shale pores are
nanopores within this organic matrix. Compared to conventional reservoirs, the micro- and
nanoscale effects in shale oil reservoirs are particularly pronounced. Molecular simulation
methods, especially molecular dynamics (MD), have become essential for studying flow
behavior in nanopores. Molecular simulations can be applied at both macroscopic and
microscopic scales, suitable for gases, liquids, and solids. Their accuracy and simplicity
make them an effective tool for studying nanopore flow.
Energies 2024, 17, 4677. https://doi.org/10.3390/en17184677 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/energiesEnergies 2024, 17, 4677 2 of 22
Numerous studies have focused on the flow behavior in nanopores under various
conditions. Nagayama et al. (2004) used MD to simulate the effect of interface wetta-
bility on relative flow in nanopores, and found no interface slip on water-wet walls in
8.22 nm pores [7]. Under the pressure-driven conditions, the interfacial resistance in
oil-wet conditions was lower than in water-wet conditions. Coasne B et al. (2006) used
MD to study argon adsorption in nanopores, showing stronger fluid–wall interactions in
graphene nanopores than in porous media [8]. Chen et al. (2008) utilized non-equilibrium
MD to investigate water flow in carbon nanopores, revealing that shear stress between
nanopores and water molecules is decisive for nanopore flow, with viscosity decreasing
as pore radius decreases or flow rate increases [9]. Kucaba et al. (2009) employed MD to
study water flow in nanopores of varying sizes and materials, demonstrating that wall
interactions significantly influence flow slip, with slip length decreasing as pore size in-
creases [10]. Falk et al. (2015) used MD to investigate hydrocarbon adsorption and flow in
nanopores, showing that flow is significantly affected by wall friction, exhibiting non-Darcy
flow characteristics [11]. In sub-nanopores, strong wall adsorption makes intercomponent
and intermolecular friction negligible, with hydrocarbon mobility in nanopores related to
carbon chain length.
There are also many studies that used MD to simulate the fluid behavior characteristics
in nano slits [12–17]. In summary, MD can effectively simulate and analyze nanoscale flow.
While the research has advanced the understanding of nanopore flow, most studies focus on
shale gas and gas–liquid two-phase flow, which is often considered a single factor. Hence,
the mechanism of oil–water two-phase flow in nanopores was investigated. The effects of
single and multiple factors on flow are identified. In addition, the results are visualized by
the numerical simulation method, and the functional relationship between the influencing
factors and the flow is clarified. The research will provide theoretical and technical support
for efficient shale oil development.
2. Nanopore Flow Model Construction
At the nanoscale, the flow behavior of fluids is significantly influenced by surface
effects and geometric constraints. To gain a deeper understanding of the flow characteristics
of fluids at the nanoscale, it is crucial to study the imbibition flow laws in nanopores. In
shale oil reservoirs, due to the nanoscale characteristics of the pore structure, factors such
as pore size, fluid properties, and wettability have a particularly complex impact on fluid
movement. The traditional Hagen–Poiseuille equation is no longer sufficient to accurately
describe fluid motion at this scale.
Therefore, there is a need to construct a nanoscale capillary force model through
simulation results, which combines computational fluid dynamics and phase field methods
(Figure 1). The model aims to describe the flow characteristics of fluids within nanopores
in shale oil reservoirs under the influence of various factors. With this model, we can more
accurately capture and predict the dynamic behavior of fluids at the nanoscale, providing
theoretical support and practical guidance for fluid management in shale reservoirs.Energies 2024, 17, 4677 3 of 22 Energies 2024, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 23
Figure 1. Velocity profile of nanopore flow model.
2.1. Nanopore Capillary Imbibition Model
In the realm of multiphaseflow research, the flow characteristics between two phases
are typically defined by their respective pressures and saturations. From a macroscopic
perspective, when considering the flow of two diﬀerent fluid phases, the pressure diﬀer-
ence between them can be interpreted as capillary pressure. When investigating the per-
meability characteristics of porous media, conducting fundamental research on the imbi-
bition flow in single nanopores is of paramount importance. To construct a model that
describes capillary permeation, we have established the following assumptions:
The capillary pores are considered to be wetted by water, which serves as the wetting
medium within the pore structures.
The impact of the flow inlet and any associated flow losses are disregarded, allowing
for a more focused analysis on the intrinsic flow dynamics within the capillary system.
Inertialforcesandtheeﬀectsofosmoticpressureareomittedfromtheconsiderations,
as they are of minor significance at the nanoscale and under the specific conditions of this
study.
The capillary force is assumed to be constant, and a fixed static contact angle is uti-
lized to characterize the wetting properties of the fluid within the nanopores.
The distribution of water and oil inside the capillary in the model is shown in Figure
2. Here, L represents the length of the capillary, in m; v denotes the seepage velocity,
in m/s; θ represents the contact angle, in °; r denotes the radius of the capillary, in m;
and xdenotes the distance of oil–water flow and seepage, in m.
Figure 1. Velocity profile of nanopore flow model.
2.1. Nanopore Capillary Imbibition Model
In the realm of multiphase flow research, the flow characteristics between two phases
are typically defined by their respective pressures and saturations. From a macroscopic
perspective, when considering the flow of two different fluid phases, the pressure difference
between them can be interpreted as capillary pressure. When investigating the permeability
characteristics of porous media, conducting fundamental research on the imbibition flow in
single nanopores is of paramount importance. To construct a model that describes capillary
permeation, we have established the following assumptions:
The capillary pores are considered to be wetted by water, which serves as the wetting
medium within the pore structures.
The impact of the flow inlet and any associated flow losses are disregarded, allowing
for a more focused analysis on the intrinsic flow dynamics within the capillary system.
Inertial forces and the effects of osmotic pressure are omitted from the considerations,
as they are of minor significance at the nanoscale and under the specific conditions of
this study.
The capillary force is assumed to be constant, and a fixed static contact angle is utilized
to characterize the wetting properties of the fluid within the nanopores.
The distribution of water and oil inside the capillary in the model is shown in Figure 2.
Here, L represents the length of the capillary, in m; v denotes the seepage velocity, in m/s; θ
represents the contact angle, in ◦; r denotes the radius of the capillary, in m; and x denotes
the distance of oil–water flow and seepage, in m.
The capillary rise phenomenon can be described using Newton’s law:
Fc − Fv − Fg = ma (1)
In the given equation, Fc represents the capillary force, in N; Fv is the dynamic viscosity,
in N; Fg is the gravity, in N; m denotes the mass of the fluid (oil or water) in the capillary, in
kg; and a is the acceleration, in m/s2.
The capillary pressure pc can be expressed according to the Young–Laplace Equation:
pc =
2σcosθ
r
(2)
In the equation, σ represents the interfacial tension, in N/m. The capillary force Fc is
represented as follows:
Fc = πr2
pc = 2πrσcosθ (3)
The shear force τv on the nanotube wall can be determined by Newton’s law of fluid
friction for laminar flow:
τv = −
2µv
r
vmax (4)Energies 2024, 17, 4677 4 of 22
In the equation, µv is the dynamic viscosity of the fluid, in Pa·s; vmax is the maximum
imbibition velocity on the nanoscale pore wall, in m/s. The imbibition flow process
involves the slow flow of incompressible Newtonian fluid in nanoscale pores, tending
towards steady Poiseuille flow. Therefore, the flow resistance follows the Hagen–Poiseuille
equation. The relationship between the maximum imbibition velocity vmax and the average
flow velocity can be expressed as follows:
vmax = 2v (5)
The expression for viscous force can be derived as follows:
Fv = Fvw + Fvo = 2πr[xτvw + (L − x)τvo] = 8π[µwx + µo(L − x)]
dx
dt
(6)
Fvw is the dynamic viscosity of the water phase, in N; Fvo is the dynamic viscosity
of the oil phase, in N; τvw is the shear force of the water phase, in N/m2; τvo is the shear
force of the oil phase, in N/m2; µw is the viscosity force of the water phase, in Pa·s; µo is
the viscosity force of the oil phase, in Pa·s; and dx
dt is the imbibition velocity, in m/s. The
imbibition velocity can be expressed as follows:
dx
dt
=
r
4
τvwx + τvo(L − x)
µwx + µo(L − x)
(7)
The total mass of oil and water in nanoscale pores can be expressed as follows:
m = πr2
ρwx + πr2
ρo(L − x) (8)
where gravity can be expressed as follows:
Fg = mg = πr2
ρwgx + πr2
ρog(L − x) (9)
In the equation, ρw and ρo represent the fluid density of the water phase and oil phase,
respectively, in kg/m3.
Substituting the above equation into Equation (1), differentiation yields can be ob-
tained as follows:
2πrσcosθ −8π[xµw + (L − x)µo]dx
dt −

πr2ρwgx + πr2ρog(L − x)

= πr2[ρwx + ρo(L − x)]d2x
dt2
(10)
Flow in nanoscale pores is steady, neglecting inertial forces; the above equation simpli-
fies as follows:
2rσcosθ −8[xµw + (L − x)µo]
dx
dt
−
h
r2
ρwgx + r2
ρog(L − x)
i
= 0 (11)
Integrating the above equation yields the analytical expression for capillary imbibi-
tion flow:
tp =
8Lµo
A
ln

Ax
B
+1

−
8(µo − µw)
A2

Ax + Bln
B
Ax + B

(12)
where A = (ρo − ρw)r2g; B = 2rσcosθ − r2ρogL. When dt is sufficiently small, the error
influence can be neglected. After differencing and integrating Equation (11), the numerical
solution for spontaneous imbibition in the capillary tube, xpi, can be expressed as follows:
xpi = Lµo −
(
(Lµo)2
−2(µo − µw)
" 1
2µwxpi−1
2 + Lµoxpi−1 − 1
2µoxpi−1
2+
r2
8

2σcosθ
r − g ρwxpi−1 + L − xpi−1

ρo

tpi − tpi−1

#)1/2
/(µo − µw) (13)Energies 2024, 17, 4677 5 of 22
The imbibition volume of the i-th nanopore can be expressed as follows:
qpi = πr2
xpi (14)
Energies 2024, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 23
Figure 2. Capillary imbibition flow model.
The capillary rise phenomenon can be described using Newton’s law:
c v g F F F ma − − = (1)
In the given equation, c F represents the capillary force, in N; v F is the dynamic
viscosity, in N; g F
is the gravity, in N; m denotes the mass of the fluid (oil or water) in
the capillary, in kg; and ais the acceleration, in m/s2.
The capillary pressure c p can be expressed according to the Young–Laplace Equa-
tion:
c
2 cos
p
r
σ θ
= (2)
In the equation, σ represents the interfacial tension, in N/m. The capillary force
c F is represented as follows:
2
c c 2 cos F r p r π π σ θ = = (3)
The shear force v τ on the nanotube wall can be determined by Newton’s law of
fluid friction for laminar flow:
max
2 v
v v
r
μ
τ = − (4)
Figure 2. Capillary imbibition flow model.
2.2. Slip Length and Boundary Conditions
The slip length is defined as the virtual distance between the fluid and solid surface
where the fluid velocity hypothetically drops to zero (Figure 3). It serves as an indicator of
slip phenomenon intensity in nanochannels. In conventional sandstone reservoirs, where
pore scales are typically at the micrometer level, the impact of slip is often negligible
relative to pore geometry. However, in shale oil reservoirs, widespread nanometer-scale
pores enable slip effects on fluid molecules at pore walls, significantly enhancing fluid
mobility. Therefore, the slip length in nanometer-scale pores must be considered for shale
oil reservoirs.
In nanochannels, under the influence of pressure differential, the developed flow
characteristics of two-phase fluids exhibit a parabolic velocity distribution. In such cases,
the shear rate of the oil film at the wall is low and uniformly distributed along the wall,
making it suitable to employ the Navier slip model [18]. This model assumes that the
slip velocity is proportional to the viscosity shear rate and the slip coefficient. Other
nanochannel boundary models include nonlinear slip models, non-local slip models, and
hybrid boundary slip models, which describe the sliding behavior of liquids on solid
interfaces. Navier proposed a simple first-order boundary slip model, which indicates
that liquid slip occurs when fluids flow near solid boundaries, and the magnitude of slip
velocity is proportional to the local strain rate. It is written as follows:
us = b(
∂u
∂n
)
W
(15)
where W represents the wall boundary; b is the slip parameter on the wall, reflecting
material property parameters.Energies 2024, 17, 4677 6 of 22
Introducing the nanoscale slip length shifts the velocity profile uniformly down-
wards, replacing the classical no-slip boundary condition with a slip boundary condition in
nanoscale pores as follows:
y = h/2 (16)
us = b
du
dy
(17)
y = 0 (18)
du
dy
= 0 (19)
8 r        
The imbibition volume of the i-th nanopore can be expressed as follows:
2
pi pi q r x π = (14
2.2. Slip Length and Boundary Conditions
The slip length is defined as the virtual distance between the fluid and solid surfac
where the fluid velocity hypothetically drops to zero (Figure 3). It serves as an indicato
of slip phenomenon intensity in nanochannels. In conventional sandstone reservoirs
where pore scales are typically at the micrometer level, the impact of slip is often neglig
ble relative to pore geometry. However, in shale oil reservoirs, widespread nanometer
scale pores enable slip eﬀects on fluid molecules at pore walls, significantly enhancin
fluid mobility. Therefore, the slip length in nanometer-scale pores must be considered fo
shale oil reservoirs.
Figure 3. Slip model at solid wall interface.
In nanochannels, under the influence of pressure diﬀerential, the developed flow
characteristics of two-phase fluids exhibit a parabolic velocity distribution. In such cases
Figure 3. Slip model at solid wall interface.
3. Single-Factor Nanopore Flow Analysis
3.1. Pore Size Impact on Nanopore Flow
In shale oil reservoirs, there are widespread nano-scale pores, and the dimensions
of these tiny pores significantly affect the reservoir’s permeability. This study aims to
investigate the permeation behavior of shale oil and fracturing fluid by varying pore
diameters (10, 12.5, 15, 17.5, and 20 nm), as shown in Figure 4. Using the graphical methods,
it illustrates changes in residual oil content under different pore sizes, further exploring the
specific impact of pore size on imbibition during well shut-in processes.Energies 2024, 17, 4677 7 of 22
Energies 2024, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 23
10 nm 12.5 nm 15 nm 17.5 nm 20 nm
(a)
10 nm 12.5 nm 15 nm 17.5 nm 20 nm
(b)
Figure 4. Flow diagram with diﬀerent apertures at 20 s and 25 s. (a) Flow diagram with diﬀer-
ent apertures at 20 s. (b) Flow diagram with diﬀerent apertures at 25 s.
From Figure 5, it is observed that the displacement eﬃciency varies with time, in-
creasing with increasing pore diameter. Larger pore diameters lead to faster displacement
rates. Particularly, when the pore diameter reaches 17.5 nm, the displacement eﬃciency
curve approaches that of 15 nm, indicating that the increasing trend of displacement eﬃ-
ciency with pore diameter in reservoirs is not strictly linear. There exists a degree of sim-
ilarity in changes due to similar pore diameters.
Figure 4. Flow diagram with different apertures at 20 s and 25 s. (a) Flow diagram with different
apertures at 20 s. (b) Flow diagram with different apertures at 25 s.
From Figure 5, it is observed that the displacement efficiency varies with time, increas-
ing with increasing pore diameter. Larger pore diameters lead to faster displacement rates.
Particularly, when the pore diameter reaches 17.5 nm, the displacement efficiency curve
approaches that of 15 nm, indicating that the increasing trend of displacement efficiency
with pore diameter in reservoirs is not strictly linear. There exists a degree of similarity in
changes due to similar pore diameters.
The displacement efficiency varies over time under different pore diameter conditions,
showing distinct trends, as shown in Figure 6. Smaller pore diameters result in longer
imbibition displacement reaction times, whereas larger pore diameters can reduce this time.
Considering pore diameter alone at the same time point, larger diameters exhibit more
significant imbibition displacement effects. The imbibition displacement efficiency in a
20 nm pore is 46% higher than that in a 10 nm pore. In nanoscale pores where dimensions
approach the average free path of fluid molecules, interactions between fluid molecules
and pore walls are significantly enhanced, affecting fluid flow capability. Moreover, asEnergies 2024, 17, 4677 8 of 22
pore diameter increases, flow velocity at the interface of the two phases also increases
(Figure 7). The flow velocity variation over time in a 20 nm pore can increase by 1.4 m/s.
In smaller pores, the non-wetting phase (oil phase) experiences increased flow resistance
due to capillary forces, while the increased surface area per unit volume in smaller pores
enhances the adsorption of fluid molecules on pore walls, further affecting flow velocity.
Therefore, pore diameter significantly influences the two-phase flow patterns in single
nanoscale pores.
Energies 2024, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 23
Figure 5. Displacement rate curves of diﬀerent pore sizes.
The displacement eﬃciency varies over time under diﬀerent pore diameter condi-
tions, showing distinct trends, as shown in Figure 6. Smaller pore diameters result in
longer imbibition displacement reaction times, whereas larger pore diameters can reduce
thistime.Consideringporediameteraloneatthesametimepoint,largerdiametersexhibit
more significant imbibition displacement eﬀects. The imbibition displacement eﬃciency
in a 20 nm pore is 46% higher than that in a 10 nm pore. In nanoscale pores where dimen-
sions approach the average free path of fluid molecules, interactions between fluid mole-
cules and pore walls are significantly enhanced, aﬀecting fluid flow capability. Moreover,
as pore diameter increases, flow velocity at the interface of the two phases also increases
(Figure 7). The flow velocity variation over time in a 20 nm pore can increase by 1.4 m/s.
In smaller pores, the non-wetting phase (oil phase) experiences increased flow resistance
due to capillary forces, while the increased surface area per unit volume in smaller pores
enhances the adsorption of fluid molecules on pore walls, further aﬀecting flow velocity.
Therefore, pore diameter significantly influences the two-phase flow patterns in single
nanoscale pores.
Figure 5. Displacement rate curves of different pore sizes.
Energies 2024, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 23
Figure 6. Pore diameter and residual volume curve. Figure 6. Pore diameter and residual volume curve.Energies 2024, 17, 4677 9 of 22
Figure 6. Pore diameter and residual volume curve.
Figure 7. The relationship between aperture and velocity.
3.2. Viscosity Ratio Impact on Nanopore Flow
In single nanoscale pores, the viscosity ratio between oil and water significantly im-
pacts flow performance. By varying the viscosities of crude oil and water, one can inves-
tigate this influence. Assuming a pore diameter of 15 nm (Figure 8), water-wet wall con-
ditions, and static pressure, experiments can be conducted to study the flow patterns of
oil and water phases in single nanoscale pores. Adjusting the viscosities of crude oil and
water allows for the modulation of phase composition parameters, further exploring their
eﬀects on the flow behavior in single nanoscale pores (Table 1).
Figure 7. The relationship between aperture and velocity.
3.2. Viscosity Ratio Impact on Nanopore Flow
In single nanoscale pores, the viscosity ratio between oil and water significantly
impacts flow performance. By varying the viscosities of crude oil and water, one can
investigate this influence. Assuming a pore diameter of 15 nm (Figure 8), water-wet wall
conditions, and static pressure, experiments can be conducted to study the flow patterns of
oil and water phases in single nanoscale pores. Adjusting the viscosities of crude oil and
water allows for the modulation of phase composition parameters, further exploring their
effects on the flow behavior in single nanoscale pores (Table 1).
Table 1. Composition relationship between crude oil and water.
Scheme
Viscosity of
Water (mPa·s)
Oil Viscosity
(mPa·s)
Oil Viscosity
(mPa·s)
Water Viscosity
(mPa·s)
1
1
10
10
8
2 8 5
3 5 3
4 3 2
5 2 1Energies 2024, 17, 4677 10 of 22 Energies 2024, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 23
10:1 8:1 5:1 3:1 2:1
10:1 10:2 10:3 10:5 10:8
Figure 8. Flow diagram with diﬀerent oil–water viscosity ratios at 15 s. Figure 8. Flow diagram with different oil–water viscosity ratios at 15 s.
Changing the viscosity of the water phase significantly affects the variation of displace-
ment efficiency over time. As the viscosity ratio decreases, the displacement efficiency also
decreases (Figure 9). For instance, at 30 s, when the viscosity ratio is 10, the displacement
efficiency reaches 62%; when the viscosity ratio decreases to 2, the displacement efficiency
drops to 45%. Therefore, variations in the dynamic viscosity of the water phase have a
significant impact on the flow of oil and water phases in single nanoscale pores. When the
viscosity ratio is 10:3 and 10:2, the displacement efficiency curves are close, indicating that
within these viscosity ratio ranges, the viscosity of the water phase has a relatively minor
effect on imbibition displacement.Energies 2024, 17, 4677 11 of 22
ciency also decreases (Figure 9). For instance, at 30 s, when the viscosity ratio is 10, the
displacement eﬃciency reaches 62%; when the viscosity ratio decreases to 2, the displace-
ment eﬃciency drops to 45%. Therefore, variations in the dynamic viscosity of the water
phase have a significant impact on the flow of oil and water phases in single nanoscale
pores. When the viscosity ratio is 10:3 and 10:2, the displacement eﬃciency curves are
close, indicating that within these viscosity ratio ranges, the viscosity of the water phase
has a relatively minor eﬀect on imbibition displacement.
Figure 9. Change displacement rate curve of aqueous phase viscosity.
It can be seen from Figures 10 and 11, when reducing the viscosity of crude oil from
10 mPa·s to 2 mPa·s, an observation at 15 s shows that the residual volume of crude oil
decreases from 98% to 27%, indicating a 71% improvement in displacement eﬃciency.
This demonstrates that reducing the viscosity of crude oil significantly enhances displace-
ment eﬃciency. The viscosity ratio between the oil and water phases has a significant im-
pact on flow performance, especially when the viscosity of the oil phase is significantly
higher than that of the water phase, restricting the flow of the oil phase in nanoscale pores.
Conversely, increasing the viscosity of water from 1 mPa·s to 8 mPa·s results in only a 5%
increase in displacement eﬃciency at 15 s. Therefore, variations in component viscosities
aﬀect the flow behavior of oil and water phases in nanoscale pores. At the nanoscale, vis-
cosity ratios simultaneously influence the flow characteristics of both phases, with lower
viscosity fluids exhibiting higher mobility in nanoscale pores. Thus, in wellbore or chem-
Figure 9. Change displacement rate curve of aqueous phase viscosity.
It can be seen from Figures 10 and 11, when reducing the viscosity of crude oil from
10 mPa·s to 2 mPa·s, an observation at 15 s shows that the residual volume of crude oil
decreases from 98% to 27%, indicating a 71% improvement in displacement efficiency. This
demonstrates that reducing the viscosity of crude oil significantly enhances displacement
efficiency. The viscosity ratio between the oil and water phases has a significant impact
on flow performance, especially when the viscosity of the oil phase is significantly higher
than that of the water phase, restricting the flow of the oil phase in nanoscale pores.
Conversely, increasing the viscosity of water from 1 mPa·s to 8 mPa·s results in only a 5%
increase in displacement efficiency at 15 s. Therefore, variations in component viscosities
affect the flow behavior of oil and water phases in nanoscale pores. At the nanoscale,
viscosity ratios simultaneously influence the flow characteristics of both phases, with lower
viscosity fluids exhibiting higher mobility in nanoscale pores. Thus, in wellbore or chemical
flooding processes, reducing the viscosity of crude oil through methods such as injecting
viscosity reducers can enhance oil flowability, contributing to increased recovery rates and
operational efficiency.
Energies 2024, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 23
ical flooding processes, reducing the viscosity of crude oil through methods such as in-
jecting viscosity reducers can enhance oil flowability, contributing to increased recovery
rates and operational eﬃciency.
Figure 10. Change in the displacement rate curve of crude oil viscosity. Figure 10. Change in the displacement rate curve of crude oil viscosity.Energies 2024, 17, 4677 12 of 22
Figure 10. Change in the displacement rate curve of crude oil viscosity.
Figure 11. Relationship between composition change and residual volume of crude oil.
3.3. Wettability Impact on Nanopore Flow
The wettability directly influences the distribution, flow, and interactions of fluids in
nanoscale pores, thereby aﬀecting flow performance and the recovery eﬃciency of oil and
gas. In investigating the imbibition process in single nanoscale pores, the wettability plays
a crucial role. By altering the contact angle, the imbibition behavior of shale oil and frac-
turing fluid under diﬀerent wetting conditions can be studied. Curves depicting displace-
ment eﬃciency over time under various conditions can be plotted to delve deeper into the
Figure 11. Relationship between composition change and residual volume of crude oil.
3.3. Wettability Impact on Nanopore Flow
The wettability directly influences the distribution, flow, and interactions of fluids in
nanoscale pores, thereby affecting flow performance and the recovery efficiency of oil and
gas. In investigating the imbibition process in single nanoscale pores, the wettability plays a
crucial role. By altering the contact angle, the imbibition behavior of shale oil and fracturing
fluid under different wetting conditions can be studied. Curves depicting displacement
efficiency over time under various conditions can be plotted to delve deeper into the impact
of wettability on two-phase flow. The model is initially set with a pore diameter of 15 nm,
inlet pressure under static conditions, and water-wet pore walls (Figure 12).Energies 2024, 17, 4677 13 of 22
Energies 2024, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 14 of 23
impact of wettability on two-phase flow. The model is initially set with a pore diameter of
15 nm, inlet pressure under static conditions, and water-wet pore walls (Figure 12).
30° 45° 60° 75° 85
(a)
30° 45° 60° 75° 85°
(b)
Figure 12. Flow diagram at diﬀerent wettability pore sizes. (a) Pore size is 15 nm. (b) Pore size is 10
nm.
The displacement eﬃciency varies significantly over time under diﬀerent wettability
conditions (Figures 13 and 14). Smaller contact angles correspond to shorter imbibition
displacement reaction times. Under the water-wet conditions, smaller contact angles in
nanoscale pores result in greater pressure gradients and diﬀerentials between oil and wa-
ter phases, facilitating easier water entry into the nanoscale pores and promoting fluid
flow and slip along the pore walls. However, increasing the static contact angle prolongs
the imbibition time for oil recovery. At 20 s, the displacement eﬃciency is 55% when the
contact angle is 30°, whereas it decreases to 23% when the contact angle is 60°, represent-
ing a 32% reduction in displacement eﬃciency. Therefore, reducing wettability under the
Figure 12. Flow diagram at different wettability pore sizes. (a) Pore size is 15 nm. (b) Pore size is 10 nm.
The displacement efficiency varies significantly over time under different wettability
conditions (Figures 13 and 14). Smaller contact angles correspond to shorter imbibition
displacement reaction times. Under the water-wet conditions, smaller contact angles in
nanoscale pores result in greater pressure gradients and differentials between oil and water
phases, facilitating easier water entry into the nanoscale pores and promoting fluid flow
and slip along the pore walls. However, increasing the static contact angle prolongs the
imbibition time for oil recovery. At 20 s, the displacement efficiency is 55% when the contact
angle is 30◦, whereas it decreases to 23% when the contact angle is 60◦, representing a 32%
reduction in displacement efficiency. Therefore, reducing wettability under the water-wet
conditions enhances the flow rate of crude oil, demonstrating a linear decrease trend in
displacement efficiency.Energies 2024, 17, 4677 14 of 22
Energies 2024, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 15 of 23
water-wet conditions enhances the flow rate of crude oil, demonstrating a linear decrease
trend in displacement eﬃciency.
Figure 13. Displacement rate curves of diﬀerent wettabilities.
Figure 14. Relation between contact angle and residual volume of crude oil.
3.4. Pressure Impact on Nanopore Flow
In the flow of single nanoscale pores, pressure inevitably aﬀects two-phase flow. It
directly influences the physical properties of fluids, interactions between phases, and flow
patterns. We studied a single nanoscale pore with a diameter of 15 nm and a contact angle
of 60°. We then investigated the impact of diﬀerent inlet pressure conditions (2 MPa, 4
MPa, 6 MPa, 8 MPa, and 10 MPa) on the flow patterns of two phases (Figure 15).
Figure 13. Displacement rate curves of different wettabilities.
Energies 2024, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 15 of 23
water-wet conditions enhances the flow rate of crude oil, demonstrating a linear decrease
trend in displacement eﬃciency.
Figure 13. Displacement rate curves of diﬀerent wettabilities.
Figure 14. Relation between contact angle and residual volume of crude oil.
3.4. Pressure Impact on Nanopore Flow
In the flow of single nanoscale pores, pressure inevitably aﬀects two-phase flow. It
directly influences the physical properties of fluids, interactions between phases, and flow
patterns. We studied a single nanoscale pore with a diameter of 15 nm and a contact angle
of 60°. We then investigated the impact of diﬀerent inlet pressure conditions (2 MPa, 4
MPa, 6 MPa, 8 MPa, and 10 MPa) on the flow patterns of two phases (Figure 15).
Figure 14. Relation between contact angle and residual volume of crude oil.
3.4. Pressure Impact on Nanopore Flow
In the flow of single nanoscale pores, pressure inevitably affects two-phase flow. It
directly influences the physical properties of fluids, interactions between phases, and flow
patterns. We studied a single nanoscale pore with a diameter of 15 nm and a contact angle
of 60◦. We then investigated the impact of different inlet pressure conditions (2 MPa, 4 MPa,
6 MPa, 8 MPa, and 10 MPa) on the flow patterns of two phases (Figure 15).Energies 2024, 17, 4677 15 of 22 Energies 2024, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 16 of 23
2 MPa 4 MPa 6 MP 8 MPa 10 MPa
(a)
2 MPa 4 MPa 6 MPa 8 MPa 10 MPa
(b)
Figure 15. Flow diagram at diﬀerent pressures at 20 and 25 s. (a) Flow diagram at diﬀerent
pressures at 25 s. (b) Flow diagram at diﬀerent pressures at 20 s.
In the flow of single nanoscale pores under pressure, higher pressures lead to in-
creased displacement eﬃciency of crude oil, showing a proportional relationship with
pressure increase and a consistent trend (Figure 16). As pressure increases, the residual
volume of crude oil decreases, demonstrating an exponential relationship with the dis-
placement eﬃciency (Figure 17). When pressure increases from 2 MPa to 10 MPa, the dis-
placement eﬃciency decreases from 66% to 55%, a reduction of 11%. Pressure variations
aﬀect the interfacial tension between phases within the pore, thereby altering capillary
pressures. Increased pressure enhances both capillary forces influenced by pressure and
gravitationaleﬀects. Therefore, the influence of pressure on flow in single nanoscale pores
is relatively more significant compared to other factors.
Figure 15. Flow diagram at different pressures at 20 and 25 s. (a) Flow diagram at different pressures
at 25 s. (b) Flow diagram at different pressures at 20 s.
In the flow of single nanoscale pores under pressure, higher pressures lead to increased
displacement efficiency of crude oil, showing a proportional relationship with pressure
increase and a consistent trend (Figure 16). As pressure increases, the residual volume
of crude oil decreases, demonstrating an exponential relationship with the displacement
efficiency (Figure 17). When pressure increases from 2 MPa to 10 MPa, the displacement
efficiency decreases from 66% to 55%, a reduction of 11%. Pressure variations affect the
interfacial tension between phases within the pore, thereby altering capillary pressures.
Increased pressure enhances both capillary forces influenced by pressure and gravitational
effects. Therefore, the influence of pressure on flow in single nanoscale pores is relatively
more significant compared to other factors.Energies 2024, 17, 4677 16 of 22
Energies 2024, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 17 of 23
Figure 16. Displacement rate curves of diﬀerent pressures.
Figure 17. The relationship of pressure and residual oil saturation.
4. Multi-Factor Nanopore Flow Analysis
4.1. Pore Size and Contact Angle Synergy
In shale oil reservoirs, the widespread distribution of nanopores endows capillary
forces witha vitalrole. The contact angle within thesenanopores isnot static. Itundergoes
dynamic adjustments in response to subtle changes in pore structure and precise control
of pressure. Taking into account the interplay of these factors, the research has unveiled a
precise quantitative relationship between the contact angle and the pore radius at the na-
noscale, which is quantitatively described by the following equation:
Figure 16. Displacement rate curves of different pressures.
Energies 2024, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 17 of 23
Figure 16. Displacement rate curves of diﬀerent pressures.
Figure 17. The relationship of pressure and residual oil saturation.
4. Multi-Factor Nanopore Flow Analysis
4.1. Pore Size and Contact Angle Synergy
In shale oil reservoirs, the widespread distribution of nanopores endows capillary
forces witha vitalrole. The contact angle within thesenanopores isnot static. Itundergoes
dynamic adjustments in response to subtle changes in pore structure and precise control
of pressure. Taking into account the interplay of these factors, the research has unveiled a
precise quantitative relationship between the contact angle and the pore radius at the na-
noscale, which is quantitatively described by the following equation:
Figure 17. The relationship of pressure and residual oil saturation.
4. Multi-Factor Nanopore Flow Analysis
4.1. Pore Size and Contact Angle Synergy
In shale oil reservoirs, the widespread distribution of nanopores endows capillary
forces with a vital role. The contact angle within these nanopores is not static. It undergoes
dynamic adjustments in response to subtle changes in pore structure and precise control
of pressure. Taking into account the interplay of these factors, the research has unveiledEnergies 2024, 17, 4677 17 of 22
a precise quantitative relationship between the contact angle and the pore radius at the
nanoscale, which is quantitatively described by the following equation:
θ = θi +13.115ln

r
ri

(20)
where θ is the contact angle at a constant pore radius; ri is the initial pore radius, taken as
15 nm, and θi is the initial contact angle, taken as 45◦ under initial conditions.
According to the quantitative relationship, an increase in pore size leads to an en-
largement of the contact angle in single nanopores (Figure 18). The model results indicate
that as the pore radius increases, the rise in contact angle results in a reduction in the
residual oil volume, which exhibits a logarithmic relationship (Figure 19). In the nanoscale
pore environment, a smaller pore size implies a stronger capillary force on the fluid, and
a smaller contact angle means that the two-phase fluid is more likely to flow under the
influence of capillary forces. When the ratio of the pore radius to the initial pore radius
increases from 2 to 6, the residual oil volume decreases from 57% to 31%, and the flow effi-
ciency is reduced by 26%. The synergistic effect of pore size and contact angle determines
the phase distribution of fluids within nanopores. In an oil–water two-phase systems,
different pore sizes and surface wettability conditions lead to variations in the distribution
of water and oil phases within the pores. Smaller pore sizes and hydrophilic surfaces favor
the distribution of the water phase in the pores, while larger pore sizes and hydrophobic
surfaces may cause the oil phase to preferentially occupy the pores.
Energies 2024, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 18 of 23
13.115ln i
i
r
r
θ θ
 
= +  
 
(20)
where θ is the contact angle at a constant pore radius; i r is the initial pore radius, taken
as 15 nm, and i θ is the initial contact angle, taken as 45° under initial conditions.
According to the quantitative relationship, an increase in pore size leads to an en-
largement of the contact angle in single nanopores (Figure 18). The model results indicate
that as the pore radius increases, the rise in contact angle results in a reduction in the
residual oil volume,whichexhibitsa logarithmicrelationship(Figure19).Inthenanoscale
pore environment, a smaller pore size implies a stronger capillary force on the fluid, and
a smaller contact angle means that the two-phase fluid is more likely to flow under the
influence of capillary forces. When the ratio of the pore radius to the initial pore radius
increases from 2 to 6, the residual oil volume decreases from 57% to 31%, and the flow
eﬃciency is reduced by 26%. The synergistic eﬀect of pore size and contact angle deter-
mines the phase distribution of fluids within nanopores. In an oil–water two-phase sys-
tems, diﬀerent pore sizes and surface wettability conditions lead to variations in the dis-
tribution of water and oil phases within the pores. Smaller pore sizes and hydrophilic
surfaces favor the distribution of the water phase in the pores, while larger pore sizes and
hydrophobic surfaces may cause the oil phase to preferentially occupy the pores.
2 3 4 5 6
Figure 18. Aperture and contact angle synergistic flow diagram (the radius ratio is 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6). Figure 18. Aperture and contact angle synergistic flow diagram (the radius ratio is 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6).Energies 2024, 17, 4677 18 of 22
Energies 2024, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 19 of 23
Figure 19. Relationship between radius and contact angle synergies and crude oil flow.
4.2. Pressure and Contact Angle Synergy
The interaction between pressure and contact angle profoundly influences the laws
of fluid motion, which is particularly crucial in practical applications such as oil and gas
production, energy storage, and filtration technology. As the pore size continuously var-
ies, the interfacial tension between the oil and water also exhibits dynamic characteristics.
Through extensive experimental research, it has been found that the wetting angle and
interfacial tension change with variations in pressure, enabling the derivation of a mathe-
matical correlation equation between the wetting angle under specific pressure conditions
and the initial wetting angle.
i
i
p
p
τ
θ θ
 
= ⋅ 
 
(21)
where τ represents the wetting modulus, a dimensionless constant typically ranging
from 0.2 to 0.3, (here taken as 0.25); i θ is the initial contact angle, taken as 45° under
initial conditions; and i p is the initial inlet pressure, taken as 2 MPa.
The pressure and contact angle synergistic flow behavior at 30 s can be shown in
Figure 20. Increasing pressure can alter the interaction between fluids and solid surfaces,
thereby aﬀecting the contact angle. Under the specific conditions, as pressure increases,
the wettability of the fluid on the solid surface may enhance, leading to an increase in the
contact angle. It can be seen from Figure 21, when the pressure and contact angle jointly
influence flow in single nanometer-sized pores, the residual volume of crude oil shows an
exponential relationshipwith pressure.As thepressure increases, the contactanglewithin
a single nanometer-sized pore also increases, thereby influencing the two-phase flow
within the pore. When the pressure increases from 2 MPa to 6 MPa, the flow eﬃciency
decreases by21%. Considering the synergisticeﬀect of the pressureand contactangle, this
may lead to a transition in the two-phase flow patterns. Under the high-pressure condi-
tions, the capillary-driven water flooding process in single nanometer-sized pores may
transition to pressure-driven flow. Hence, the two-phase flow in single nanometer-sized
pores exhibits complex exponential relationship variations under the high-pressure con-
ditions.
Figure 19. Relationship between radius and contact angle synergies and crude oil flow.
4.2. Pressure and Contact Angle Synergy
The interaction between pressure and contact angle profoundly influences the laws
of fluid motion, which is particularly crucial in practical applications such as oil and gas
production, energy storage, and filtration technology. As the pore size continuously varies,
the interfacial tension between the oil and water also exhibits dynamic characteristics.
Through extensive experimental research, it has been found that the wetting angle and
interfacial tension change with variations in pressure, enabling the derivation of a mathe-
matical correlation equation between the wetting angle under specific pressure conditions
and the initial wetting angle.
θ = θi ·

p
pi
τ
(21)
where τ represents the wetting modulus, a dimensionless constant typically ranging from
0.2 to 0.3, (here taken as 0.25); θi is the initial contact angle, taken as 45◦ under initial
conditions; and pi is the initial inlet pressure, taken as 2 MPa.
The pressure and contact angle synergistic flow behavior at 30 s can be shown in
Figure 20. Increasing pressure can alter the interaction between fluids and solid surfaces,
thereby affecting the contact angle. Under the specific conditions, as pressure increases,
the wettability of the fluid on the solid surface may enhance, leading to an increase in the
contact angle. It can be seen from Figure 21, when the pressure and contact angle jointly
influence flow in single nanometer-sized pores, the residual volume of crude oil shows an
exponential relationship with pressure. As the pressure increases, the contact angle within
a single nanometer-sized pore also increases, thereby influencing the two-phase flow within
the pore. When the pressure increases from 2 MPa to 6 MPa, the flow efficiency decreases
by 21%. Considering the synergistic effect of the pressure and contact angle, this may lead
to a transition in the two-phase flow patterns. Under the high-pressure conditions, the
capillary-driven water flooding process in single nanometer-sized pores may transition to
pressure-driven flow. Hence, the two-phase flow in single nanometer-sized pores exhibits
complex exponential relationship variations under the high-pressure conditions.Energies 2024, 17, 4677 19 of 22
Energies 2024, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 20 of 23
2 MPa 3 MPa 4 MPa 5 MPa 6 MPa
Figure 20. Pressure and contact angle synergistic flow at 30 s diagram.
Figure 21. Relationship between pressure and contact angle synergies and crude oil flow.
4.3. Pressure, Pore Size, and Contact Angle Synergy
The contact angle and interfacial tension are influenced by pore diameter and pore
pressure, where changes in the pore diameter are a result of variations in the pore pres-
sure. The interactions between phases within nanoscale pores are typically complex, ne-
cessitating consideration of how pore deformation and pressure changes aﬀect them. To
establish a mathematical model of phase interactions in a dynamic pressure field, it is es-
sential to integrate the synergistic eﬀects of pressure and pore diameter(Table 2). The
mathematical model for contact angle variation under the synergistic action of pressure
and pore diameter can be expressed as follows:
Figure 20. Pressure and contact angle synergistic flow at 30 s diagram.
Energies 2024, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 20 of 23
2 MPa 3 MPa 4 MPa 5 MPa 6 MPa
Figure 20. Pressure and contact angle synergistic flow at 30 s diagram.
Figure 21. Relationship between pressure and contact angle synergies and crude oil flow.
4.3. Pressure, Pore Size, and Contact Angle Synergy
The contact angle and interfacial tension are influenced by pore diameter and pore
pressure, where changes in the pore diameter are a result of variations in the pore pres-
sure. The interactions between phases within nanoscale pores are typically complex, ne-
cessitating consideration of how pore deformation and pressure changes aﬀect them. To
establish a mathematical model of phase interactions in a dynamic pressure field, it is es-
sential to integrate the synergistic eﬀects of pressure and pore diameter(Table 2). The
mathematical model for contact angle variation under the synergistic action of pressure
and pore diameter can be expressed as follows:
Figure 21. Relationship between pressure and contact angle synergies and crude oil flow.
4.3. Pressure, Pore Size, and Contact Angle Synergy
The contact angle and interfacial tension are influenced by pore diameter and pore
pressure, where changes in the pore diameter are a result of variations in the pore pressure.
The interactions between phases within nanoscale pores are typically complex, necessitating
consideration of how pore deformation and pressure changes affect them. To establish
a mathematical model of phase interactions in a dynamic pressure field, it is essential to
integrate the synergistic effects of pressure and pore diameter(Table 2). The mathematical
model for contact angle variation under the synergistic action of pressure and pore diameter
can be expressed as follows:
θ =

θi +13.115ln

1 −
[(1 + ϕ) + (1 − ϕ)υ] · pef f
E(1 − ϕ)

·

p
pi
τ
(22)Energies 2024, 17, 4677 20 of 22
Table 2. The change of contact angle under the influence of multiple factors.
Inlet Pressure
/MPa
Porosity/% Poisson’s Ratio
Effective Stress
/MPa
Initial Pressure
/MPa
Young’s Modulus
/MPa
Contact
Angle/◦
2 0.1 0.15 0.5 2 5 41◦
3 0.1 0.15 0.5 2 5 48.38◦
4 0.1 0.15 0.5 2 5 53.71◦
5 0.1 0.15 0.5 2 5 57.81◦
6 0.1 0.15 0.5 2 5 61.5◦
Pressure, pore diameter, and contact angle simultaneously influence flow in nanoscale
pores. As the pressure decreases, the dimensionless contact angle decreases, while interfacial
tension increases, leading to an increase in capillary forces (Figure 22). When considering
the synergistic effects of pore diameter and pressure variations, the contact angle increases,
with the increase in interfacial tension being less significant. Dynamic capillary forces become
prominent, thereby restricting crude oil flow (Figure 23). The residual volume of crude oil
decreases from 42% to 26%, a reduction of 16%. When considering the combined influence of
pressure, pore diameter, and contact angle, the impact of pressure on crude oil flow efficiency
is relatively minor compared to considering only two of these factors.
( ) ( )
( )
1 1
13.115ln 1
1
eff
i
i
p p
E p
τ
φ φ υ
θ θ
φ
    + + − ⋅         = + − ⋅         −        
(22)
Table 2. The change of contact angle under the influence of multiple factors.
Inlet Pres-
sure
/MPa
Porosity/%
Poisson’s
Ratio
Effective
Stress
/MPa
Initial Pres-
sure
/MPa
Young’s
Modulus
/MPa
Contact An-
gle/°
2 0.1 0.15 0.5 2 5 41°
3 0.1 0.15 0.5 2 5 48.38°
4 0.1 0.15 0.5 2 5 53.71°
5 0.1 0.15 0.5 2 5 57.81°
6 0.1 0.15 0.5 2 5 61.5°
Pressure, pore diameter, and contact angle simultaneously influence flow in na-
noscale pores.As the pressure decreases, the dimensionless contact angledecreases, while
interfacial tension increases, leading to an increase in capillary forces (Figure 22). When
considering the synergistic eﬀects of pore diameter and pressure variations, the contact
angle increases, with the increase in interfacial tension being less significant. Dynamic ca-
pillary forces become prominent, thereby restricting crude oil flow (Figure 23). The resid-
ual volume of crude oil decreases from 42% to 26%, a reduction of 16%. When considering
the combined influence of pressure, pore diameter, and contact angle, the impact of pres-
sure on crude oil flow eﬃciency is relatively minor compared to considering only two of
these factors.
2 MPa 3 MPa 4 MPa 5 MPa 6 MPa at 30 s
Figure 22. Multifactor synergistic flow at 30 s diagram. Figure 22. Multifactor synergistic flow at 30 s diagram.
Energies 2024, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 22 of 23
Figure 23. Crude oil flow relationship under the influence of multiple factors.
5. Conclusions
Firstly, this study focuses on the imbibition flow laws of single nanopores. Moreover,
the imbibition flow in single nanopores is a complex phenomenon occurring at the na-
noscale, influenced by the various factors, including pore size, pressure, viscosity ratio,
Figure 23. Crude oil flow relationship under the influence of multiple factors.Energies 2024, 17, 4677 21 of 22
5. Conclusions
Firstly, this study focuses on the imbibition flow laws of single nanopores. More-
over, the imbibition flow in single nanopores is a complex phenomenon occurring at the
nanoscale, influenced by the various factors, including pore size, pressure, viscosity ratio,
wettability, and the coupled effects of these factors. In the imbibition process, the size of
the nanopore is a critical factor in determining the efficiency of imbibition. Specifically,
smaller pore sizes can enhance capillary forces, thereby facilitating the adsorption and
flow of liquids within the pores, effectively increasing the rate of imbibition. In contrast,
larger pore sizes will reduce capillary forces, thereby decreasing the rate of imbibition. The
intentional conclusions are as follows:
1. Pressure is a significant factor affecting the flow of liquid in pores, influencing not
only the velocity of liquid flow but also altering the interactive forces within the pores.
Higher pressure levels can enhance capillary forces, propelling the liquid towards the
central region of the pores, thereby facilitating the imbibition process. Conversely, lower
pressure levels weaken capillary forces, restricting the movement of the liquid and leading
to a decrease in the rate of imbibition.
2. The viscosity ratio also significantly impacts the imbibition flow in single nanopores.
A lower viscosity ratio implies that the fluid flows more smoothly through the pores,
leading to higher imbibition rates. Conversely, a higher viscosity ratio can impede fluid
flow, thereby reducing the imbibition rate. Changes in the viscosity ratio between oil and
water phases directly affect the relative permeability. When the viscosity of the oil phase is
significantly higher than that of the water phase, the flow of oil in nanopores is restricted.
3. Wettability is another critical factor influencing the interaction between liquids
and pore walls. When the pore walls exhibit hydrophilicity, liquids are more readily
adsorbed onto the pore walls and more easily propelled into the pores, which facilitates the
imbibition reaction. Conversely, if the pore walls exhibit hydrophobicity, the adsorption and
imbibition rates of the liquid will decrease, leading to a reduction in imbibition efficiency.
This illustrates the significant role that wettability plays in controlling the dynamic behavior
of liquids within the pores.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, X.D. and M.Q.; methodology, X.D.; software, M.Q.;
validation, X.D., M.Q. and X.Z.; formal analysis, A.W.; investigation, Z.L.; resources, X.D.; data
curation, M.Q.; writing—original draft preparation, X.D., X.Z., E.G. and Y.C.; writing—review and
editing, X.D. and X.Z.; funding acquisition, X.D. All authors have read and agreed to the published
version of the manuscript.
Funding: This workis supported bythe NaturalScience Foundationof JiangsuProvince (BK20241945)
and CNPC-CZU innovation alliance.
Data Availability Statement: The data that support the findings of this study are available from the
corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Acknowledgments: This work is supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province
(BK20241945) and CNPC-CZU innovation alliance.
Conflicts of Interest: Authors Zhengdong Lei and Erpeng Guo were employed by the company
PetroChina Company Limited. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict
of interest.
References
1. Zang, X.; Pang, J.; Ma, L.; Zhu, Z. Exploration of the Exploitation Potential of Continental Shale Oil in China. Chem. Ind. Manag.
2024, 5, 77–79.
2. Li, Y.; Zhao, Q.; Lu, Q.; Xue, Z.; Cao, X.; Liu, Z. Evaluation Techniques and Practices for the Development of Continental Shale Oil
in China. Pet. Explor. Dev. 2022, 49, 955–964. [CrossRef]
3. Liu, D. Study on the Mechanism of Micro-Imbibition of Fracturing Fluid and “Soaking Well” for Enhanced Production; China University
of Petroleum: Beijing, China, 2017; p. 109.Energies 2024, 17, 4677 22 of 22
4. Sun, Q.; Wang, W.; Su, Y.; Xun, J.; Guo, X.; Li, G. Characteristics of Microscopic Pore Oil Mobilization during the Imbibition of
Fracturing Fluid in Shale Reservoirs. J. Cent. South Univ. (Nat. Sci. Ed.) 2022, 53, 3311–3322.
5. Wang, Q.; Zhao, J.; Hu, Y.; Ren, L.; Zhao, C. Optimization Method for Shut-In Time after Hydraulic Fracturing in Shale Oil
Reservoirs. Pet. Explor. Dev. 2022, 49, 586–596. [CrossRef]
6. Wang, X. Optimization of Shut-In Time after Fracturing Based on Imbibition Experiments in Tight Reservoirs; Northeast Petroleum
University: Daqing, China, 2022; p. 71.
7. Nagayama, G.; Cheng, P. Effects of interface wettability on microscale flow by molecular dynamics simulation. Int. J. Heat Mass
Transf. 2003, 47, 501–513. [CrossRef]
8. Coasne, B.; Jain, S.K.; Gubbins, K.E. Adsorption, structure and dynamics of fluids in ordered and disordered models of porous
carbons. Mol. Phys. 2006, 104, 3491–3499. [CrossRef]
9. Chen, X.; Cao, G.; Han, A.; Punyamurtula, V.K.; Liu, L.; Culligan, P.J.; Kim, T.; Qiao, Y. Nanoscale Fluid Transport: Size and Rate
Effects. Nano Lett. 2008, 8, 2988–2992. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10. Kucaba-Pietal, A.; Kordos, A. Water nanovortices formation in 2D open type long nanocavities. Molecular dynamics study. J. Mol.
Liq. 2018, 249, 160–168. [CrossRef]
11. Falk, K.; Coasne, B.; Pellenq, R.; Ulm, F.-J.; Bocquet, L. Subcontinuum mass transport of condensed hydrocarbons in nanoporous
media. Nat. Commun. 2015, 6, 6949. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12. Jin, B.; Bi, R.; Nasrabadi, H. Molecular simulation of the pore size distribution effect on phase behavior of methane confined in
nanopores. Fluid Phase Equilibria 2017, 452, 94–102. [CrossRef]
13. Liu, B.; Qi, C.; Zhao, X.; Teng, G.; Zhao, L.; Zheng, H.; Zhan, K.; Shi, J. Nanoscale Two-Phase Flow of Methane and Water in Shale
Inorganic Matrix. J. Phys. Chem. C 2018, 122, 26671–26679. [CrossRef]
14. Yang, Q.; Jin, B.; Banerjee, D.; Nasrabadi, H. Direct visualization and molecular simulation of dewpoint pressure of a confined
fluid in sub-10 nm slit pores. Fuel 2019, 235, 1216–1223. [CrossRef]
15. Fang, T. Molecular Simulation Study of the Microscopic Mechanism of CO2 Flooding in Tight Reservoirs; China University of Petroleum
(East China): Qingdao, China, 2020.
16. Zhang, D.; Tang, H.; Zhang, X.; Ranjith, P.; Perera, M. Molecular simulation of methane adsorption in nanoscale rough slits. J. Nat.
Gas Sci. Eng. 2022, 102, 104608. [CrossRef]
17. Chen, J.; Ma, N.; Guo, J.; Zhao, J.; Wei, N. Molecular Simulation of Adsorption and Transport of Shale Gas in Rough Nanopores. J.
At. Mol. Phys. 2024, 41, 67–74.
18. Neto, C.; Evans, D.R.; Bonaccurso, E.; Butt, H.-J.; Craig, V.S.J. Boundary slip in Newtonian liquids: A review of experimental
studies. Rep. Prog. Phys. 2005, 68, 2859–2897. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.