Citation: de Souza Lopes, H.H.;
Ferreira Lima, L.J.; de Lima Soares,
T.W.; Teles Vieira, F.H. Deep
Deterministic Policy Gradient-Based
Resource Allocation Considering
Network Slicing and Device-to-Device
Communication in Mobile Networks.
Sensors 2024, 24, 6079. https://
doi.org/10.3390/s24186079
Academic Editor: Peter Han Joo
Chong
Received: 10 July 2024
Revised: 3 August 2024
Accepted: 19 August 2024
Published: 20 September 2024
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
sensors
Article
Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient-Based Resource Allocation
Considering Network Slicing and Device-to-Device
Communication in Mobile Networks
Hudson Henrique de Souza Lopes 1,* , Lucas Jose Ferreira Lima 1, Telma Woerle de Lima Soares 2
and Flávio Henrique Teles Vieira 1,
1 Electrical, Mechanical and Computer (EMC) School of Engineering, Federal University of Goias (UFG),
Goiânia 74605010, GO, Brazil; lima_lucas@discente.ufg.br (L.J.F.L.); flavio_vieira@ufg.br (F.H.T.V.)
2 Advanced Knowledge Center for Immersive Technologies (AKCIT), Federal University of Goias (UFG),
Goiânia 74605010, GO, Brazil; telma@inf.ufg.br
* Correspondence: hudson_lopes@ufg.br
Abstract: Next-generation mobile networks, such as those beyond the 5th generation (B5G) and
6th generation (6G), have diverse network resource demands. Network slicing (NS) and device-to-
device (D2D) communication have emerged as promising solutions for network operators. NS is a
candidate technology for this scenario, where a single network infrastructure is divided into multiple
(virtual) slices to meet different service requirements. Combining D2D and NS can improve spectrum
utilization, providing better performance and scalability. This paper addresses the challenging
problem of dynamic resource allocation with wireless network slices and D2D communications using
deep reinforcement learning (DRL) techniques. More specifically, we propose an approach named
DDPG-KRP based on deep deterministic policy gradient (DDPG) with K-nearest neighbors (KNNs)
and reward penalization (RP) for undesirable action elimination to determine the resource allocation
policy maximizing long-term rewards. The simulation results show that the DDPG-KRP is an efficient
solution for resource allocation in wireless networks with slicing, outperforming other considered
DRL algorithms.
Keywords: deep reinforcement learning; network slicing; device-to-device; resource allocation
1. Introduction
Fifth-generation (5G), next-generation beyond 5G (B5G), and sixth-generation (6G)
wireless communication networks are designed as multi-service networks to meet the
diverse demands created by the emergence of demanding applications, such as smart
cities, Internet of Things (IoT), and Industry 4.0. Recently, a large-scale dense network is
growing as a trend for next-generation communication networks due to its advantages
in terms of traffic capacity and diversified services. In this scenario, network slicing (NS)
has received much attention as a flexible means of supporting service varieties. NS allows
multiple independent and isolated virtual networks to coexist on the same network physical
infrastructure [1].
Device-to-device (D2D) communication is also a promising solution for improving
cellular network performance. D2D enables a direct connection between devices close
enough with very little or no base station (BS) involvement. As such, it is a technique
that can alleviate traffic from the BS. The user equipment (UE) in D2D communication
has high transmission signal power and low transmission delay due to proximity. These
characteristics result in increased spectral efficiency and throughput [2]. D2D communica-
tion is divided into two main categories: inband and outband. Each category is divided
into two subcategories: underlay and overlay. In the inband category, D2D pairs use the
frequency band of cellular communication, different from the outband category, which
Sensors 2024, 24, 6079. https://doi.org/10.3390/s24186079 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sensorsSensors 2024, 24, 6079 2 of 21
utilizes a different band. For the underlay subcategory, cellular and D2D communications
share the cellular spectrum, while in the overlay subcategory, each D2D pair uses dedicated
resources within the cellular spectrum [3].
Recently, the idea of combining D2D communication with NS in wireless network
models has been on the rise [2]. Radio resource allocation effectively and efficiently in light
of these paradigms is a complicated problem to solve; existing traditional approaches fail
to provide good solutions due to the following characteristics [1]:
• Mathematical modeling: taking into account the diversity of network slice services
combined with D2D communications and the constraints of the physical environment,
it becomes complex to obtain a mathematical expression for the allocation of radio
resources that meets the requirements of each service (e.g., latency, service-level
agreement (SLA) and throughput).
• Traditional approaches do not adapt to episodic uncertainty: traditional optimization
approaches require precise mathematical models with known parameters to ade-
quately perform, which is often difficult to achieve in practice. Due to the lack of
ability to explore and learn from the environment, traditional approaches frequently
do not allocate resources efficiently.
In this context, deep reinforcement learning (DRL) algorithms, a branch of artificial
intelligence (AI) that uses deep neural networks (DNNs), are attractive for exploring
the environment and learning how to allocate radio resources. Algorithms using DRL
have been considered excellent solutions for allocating radio resources in next-generation
wireless networks that consider the NS paradigm [1,4,5].
This work proposes an approach named (DDPG-KRP) based on the deep deterministic
policy gradient (DDPG) algorithm with K-nearest neighbor (KNN) clustering and reward
penalization (RP). The KNN algorithm discretizes action at the output of the actor network
that is part of the DDPG; the proposed reward penalization strategy consists of assigning a
null reward if the action generated does not meet the SLA requirements of each slice. The
proposed approach is based on improving agent learning and providing SLAs in each slice.
To apply and evaluate the performance of the proposed approach through computational
simulations, a mobile network scenario with D2D communication and network slices based
on two service categories (ultra-reliable and low-latency communication (URLLC) and
video) was considered. In this article, the underlay approach of the inband category is
adopted to share the spectrum with all UEs connected to the D2D pair in each slice. We
used the same data traffic model as in [1].
In summary, the main contributions of this paper are the following:
• The proposal of the DDPG-KRP algorithm applied to the problem of limited resource
allocation from BS to UEs. The radio resource allocation problem is modeled through
state transitions considering a mobile network with NS and D2D communication.
• A reward function is proposed in an augmented action space scenario where the
agent learning process occurs without prior knowledge of a closed-form mathematical
expression and system statistics, such as packet arrivals and channel quality of UEs.
The proposed reward function generates a compromise between meeting the SLA
requirements and maximizing the throughput and packet delivery ratio (PDR) in each
slice while efficiently consuming the least amount of power possible. Reward penalty
assigns power equal to zero to actions that do not satisfying the SLA constraints of
each service.
• The action elimination strategy is integrated into the deep-Q network (DQN) and
double DQN (DDQN) agent training to eliminate the combination of undesirable
actions exceeding the total available resource capacity. Agent exploration is directed
toward desirable actions, improving the chances of making the optimal resource
allocation decision and increasing the training convergence speed.Sensors 2024, 24, 6079 3 of 21
• The DDPG-KRP algorithm performance is validated through extensive simulations.
The results show that this algorithm significantly outperforms the other considered
DRL-based methods due to better learning in high-dimensional action spaces.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 presents the main works
related to this study; Section 3 provides the formulation of the radio resource allocation
problem in a network slicing scenario based on two service categories (i.e., URLLC and
video), where each slice has a probability distribution representing its network traffic. This
section also presents a reward function for the agent’s learning process; Section 4 begins
with some reinforcement learning (RL) characteristics, then describes the motivation for
the evolution of RL to DRL and introduces the proposed DDPG-KRP algorithm to solve
the resource allocation problem considering NS and D2D and the strategy to reduce the
high dimensionality of the action space; Section 5 discusses the results obtained from the
DRL agents that learn through the reward function for resource allocation considering NS
and D2D; and Section 6 summarizes the conclusions obtained.
2. Related Work
Radio resource management for improving the performance of next-generation wire-
less networks, such as those involving B5G, is a complex problem to solve using traditional
mathematical methods. Therefore, considering related challenges, in the last decade, many
research projects involving DRL, D2D, and NS have been developed, achieving promis-
ing results. In [6], the authors explored the sparse channel estimation (CE) problem of
frequency-selective multipath channels in a filter bank multicarrier with offset quadrature
amplitude modulation (FBMC/OQAM) industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) communica-
tion systems from the perspective of a sparse Bayesian learning (SBL) framework. The
authors proposed the Block SBL (BSBL) algorithm to estimate the channel performance by
exploiting the block–sparse structure of the sparse multipath channel model. Computer
simulation results demonstrated the robustness of the BSBL CE approach in FBMC/OQAM
systems, which can achieve lower mean square error (MSE) and bit error rate (BER) than
the traditional least squares (LS) method and classical compressive sensing method.
An approach to allocating radio resources in networks that consider network slicing
and D2D communication was presented in [2]. The authors presented an algorithm based
on traditional mathematical methods that solved the NP-hard optimization problem to
maximize the average spectral efficiency and throughput of the 5G heterogeneous cellular
network based on D2D with NS. In other approaches that did not consider network
slicing, the authors also formulated the resource allocation problem through a complex
optimization problem. They used traditional algorithms to solve the problem, such as those
described in the papers [3,7,8]. However, these approaches are not adaptive to the stochastic
changes in the environment that consider network slicing and D2D communication. In this
work, we propose using a DRL-based algorithm that adapts according to the environment
variations and performs the adaptive joint allocation of power and bandwidth efficiently.
Among the approaches that consider network slicing and D2D simultaneously, those that
use reinforcement learning are the ones that have shown the best results [9]. Due to this
reason, we focused on comparing the proposed DDPG-KRP algorithm with an approach
using DQN that is similar to the one used in [4,9].
In [4], the authors investigated the application of DQN to solve some typical resource
management problems in NS scenarios and demonstrated the advantages of this technique
over some resource allocation schemes. The DRL agent allocated a bandwidth between
slices, but a pre-training delay was found to satisfy the SLAs of each slice. In [1], simi-
lar to [4], the same probability distributions were used to represent the network traffic
demand in each slice. However, in [1], the resource allocation problem was formulated
as a constrained Markov decision process. To solve the problem, the authors proposed a
DRL-based algorithm using interior-point policy optimization. The simulations, however,
showed that the agent proximal policy optimization (PPO) acting without restriction canSensors 2024, 24, 6079 4 of 21
achieve good rewards. In this paper, the same network traffic demand was used for each
slice and D2D communications were inserted for spectral efficiency optimization.
In [3], the authors formulated the resource virtualization problem in a wireless network
with D2D communication underlay. This combination generated a nonlinear integer
programming problem divided into two smaller linear integer problems. Both possible
solutions were combined, and the problem was solved using two different schedulers.
In [9], the authors proposed a resource allocation scheme between slices in a D2D-based
virtualized communication network. A DRL agent was used for resource adjustment
between slices. The authors formulated the resource allocation problem as a convex
optimization problem and solved it with an alternating direction method. They aimed to
balance resource utilization and quality of service (QoS) for multiple slices. In [10], the
authors proposed an energy-efficient resource allocation model for D2D communication in
wireless personal networks. The algorithm is compared with other models in the literature
and shows good results in the proposed scenario without network slicing.
In [11], the authors proposed a DRL-based NS technique. The DQN algorithm was
more specifically used to find the resource allocation policy maximizing the throughput
while satisfying the QoS requirements in B5G systems. The authors employed a technique
for eliminating undesirable actions that cannot satisfy the QoS requirements. Accordingly,
the DRL agent exploration was directed toward desirable actions, improving the chances of
making the optimal decision in resource allocation and enhancing the convergence speed
in DRL training. The output of the DQN neural network is based on the discrete amount
of possible actions; hence, a huge action space makes it difficult to learn the agent. In this
work, we approach the DDPG agent with KNN to take the best action in a discrete space.
In addition, we propose a reward penalization approach for the DDPG algorithm so that
the agent does not take undesirable actions, to try to efficiently solve the problem of power
and bandwidth allocation in networks with network slicing and D2D communication.
In [12], the authors proposed a DRL-based approach for inter-slice resource allocation in
a dense long-range wide-area network. Each slice has a corresponding DQN agent that
allocates the spread factor and the transmission power to the IoT devices to provide the QoS
requirements. In other words, the conventional scheme was replaced with multi-agent DRL
with different reward function designs for each slice according to the QoS requirements.
In this work, a scenario is assumed considering massive device connection in a small
cell and a bandwidth of 10 MHz, similar to that in [3,4,9,13]. One of the pillars of an IoT
network based on intelligent sensors for industrial applications is the efficient allocation
of available radio resources. Resource management in wireless networks has become an
increasingly complex demanding solution that has adapted to the non-trivial nature of the
current difficulties. In this work, DRL algorithms are used to find solutions for the resource
allocation problem in systems involving a massive connection of intelligent devices.
In [14], the authors proposed an adaptive NS algorithm for vehicular networks to
temporarily prioritize emergency traffic in emergency situations while maintaining an
acceptable QoS for non-incident-related services in a radio resource-constrained environ-
ment. Software-defined networking (SDN), network function virtualization (NFV), and
fog computing paradigms mainly enabled the proposed solution. However, the authors
reported the need to have a DRL method to support the vehicular application module in
resource allocation between slices. In this work, our main objective is to solve the problem
of allocating radio resources flexibly and efficiently, improving the SLA required for each
service. To achieve this goal, we propose the use of D2D communication in conjunction
with NS. The task of radio resource allocation in this scenario is a challenge even for intelli-
gent algorithm models based on deep reinforcement learning such as DQN and DDQN
because the output of the neural network of these agents is based on the number of possible
combinations of actions, which in large-scale mobile network environments leads to the
problem widely known in the literature as the curse of dimensionality [15]. In this work,
we propose using the DDPG algorithm because the action this agent takes does not start
from a choice of action from the total number of possible combinations, i.e., the searchSensors 2024, 24, 6079 5 of 21
space is adequately reduced, making the DDPG algorithm more efficient. We present an
advance in the state of the art with the proposal of the DDPG-KRP algorithm, inserting the
KNN algorithm into the DDPG agent to discretize the action taken, and using the reward
penalty to avoid choosing undesired actions.
3. Resource Allocation Considering NS and D2D
For the sake of readability, all the symbols and optimization variables are summarized
in Table 1. This section discusses the state and action spaces and the reward function for the
proposed scenario. We considered that a single BS provides the radio resource for network
slices running different services (i.e., URLLC and video). D2D communication occurs in
each slice of the network, as shown in Figure 1. The considered wireless communication
system model refers to the downlink direction and comprises a small cell with a BS at its
center. We used the inband category and the underlay subcategory to reuse the spectrum
while considering the interference effect on the resource allocation to any UE connected to
the D2D pair. However, we assume that UEs do not reuse spectra from other UEs.
Table 1. Notations.
Notations Description Notations Description
Γ Signal to interference plus noise ratio
(SINR)
Q(s(t),a(t)) Q-value function
Γd SINR of the D2D pair d s(t) System state
Γj SINR of UE j a(t) System action
GBj Channel gain between the BS and the
UE j
r(s(t),a(t)) Reward function
Gjd Channel gain between the UE j and the
D2D pair d
α, β Constants used to add weight to values and
maintain them with the same number of digits
Gdd Channel gain between the D2D pair d
devices
Rb Replay buffer
Guv Channel gain between two devices PDR Package delivery rate
GBd Channel gain between the BS and the
D2D pair d
NPR Number of packets received
pd Transmission signal power from D2D
pair d
NPQ(t) Number of packets in the queue at time t
pj Transmission signal power from UE j NPT Number of packets transmitted
σ2
z Noise power R Discounted cumulative reward
Pbs BS power γ discount factor
duv Distance between the transmitter u and
the receiver v
π(s) Policy
Kuv Normalization constant π(s)∗ Optimal policy
δ Loss exponent µ(s|θµ) Deterministic policy
PL Path loss L Bellman loss function
wd Bandwidth of the D2D pair shared with
the UE
J Expected return from the start of the distribu-
tion
wj Bandwidth allocated to the UE j T Represents how many time steps are still left
in the training session or episode
Z Total number of UEs η Noise in the actor output
csi Channel state information ρ Smoothing factor
C Shannon capacity Θ′ Weights of the target Q-network
L Lagrange’s dual method Θ Weights of the main Q-network
λ Lagrange multiplier θµ Weights of the actor main network
E[·] Expectation operator θQ Weights of the critic main network
∇ Gradient θµ′
Weights of the actor target network
EE Energy efficiency θQ′
Weights of the critic target network
D Total number of D2D pairs ActionMax Total number of available slots for allocationSensors 2024, 24, 6079 6 of 21
Video slice URLLC slice
Downlink direcon
G B j
Gjd
G B d
Gdd
D2D pair Channel gain UE
Figure 1. Mobile communication system model.
Similar to that in [1], the traffic demand of the UEs was generated by using the
probabilistic distributions described in Table 2 based on their respective streaming model.
Accordingly, in this work, resource allocation is performed at each transmission time
interval (TTI), and orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM) is considered
the technique utilized in the long-term evolution (LTE) transmission downlink, which
allows a simultaneous transmission of different data packets by assigning different sub-
carriers to the user [16]. A resource block (RB) is the minimum resource allocation and
includes resources in the time and frequency domains. The composition of an RB in 5G
mobile networks is more flexible based on its numerology; in this work, we have assumed
numerology 0, i.e., in the frequency domain, it is composed of 12 consecutive 15 KHz sub-
carriers, and in the time domain, it has a duration slot of 0.5 ms [15]. In our implementation,
we consider a bandwidth of 10 MHz. In such a system, we have 50 RBs per slot. RBs are
always scheduled in pairs composing a scheduling block (SB), with a duration of 1 ms [16].
Table 2. Parameter settings.
Services URLLC Video
Slices 4 3
UEs 4 8
D2D pairs Poisson distribution [mean = 5] Poisson distribution [mean = 5]
Inter-arrival time distribution Exponential [mean = 180 ms] Truncated Pareto [exponential = 1.2,
mean = 6 ms, max = 12.5 ms]
Packet size distribution Truncated lognormal [mean = 2 MB, stan-
dard deviation = 0.722 MB, max = 5 MB]
Truncated pareto [exponential = 1.2,
mean = 100 byte, max = 250 byte]
SLA: Rate 10 Mbps 5 Mbps
SLA: Latency 5 ms 10 msSensors 2024, 24, 6079 7 of 21
3.1. Channel Model
In this work, the bandwidth allocated to the D2D pair is the same as the UEs connected
to the D2D pair. The spectrum between the UEs and the connected D2D pairs is reused;
hence, the total throughput of the network slice is increased. When packet transmission
occurs in the downlink direction, UEs are exposed to interference when any D2D peer
transmits using the same allocated bandwidth. Our focus in this work is on a single
cell scenario. Therefore, we do not consider intercell interference. When two devices
communicate using the same frequency band, there is the possibility of interference. This
interference can reduce the quality of communication between these devices or even lead
to a total loss of communication. One of the main challenges of D2D communication is
managing this interference [10].
The interference from the D2D communication to the UEs in the cellular network must
be restricted to maintain a minimum level of network performance. If the distance between
the D2D devices is long, the D2D will require more power. In this case, the cellular network
loses performance because of interference [17]. The interference level will not only depend
on the transmission power of the D2D pair but also channel gain between the D2D pair
and the UEs. The signal to interference plus noise ratio (SINR) of UE j is given as follows:
Γj =
pj × GBj
σ2 + ∑D
d=1 pd × Gjd
, (1)
where Gjd denotes the channel gain between the UE j and the D2D pair d, GBj denotes the
channel gain between the BS and the UE j, pj and pd are transmission signal power from
UE j and the D2D pair d, respectively. σ2
z is the noise power. The SINR of the D2D pair d is
given as
Γd =
pd × Gdd
σ2 + ∑Z
j=1 pj × GBd
, (2)
where Gdd denotes the channel gain between the D2D pair d devices, and GBd denotes
the channel gain between the BS and the D2D pair d. According to [17], the channel gain
between two devices is represented as
Guv = Kuv × d−δ
uv , (3)
where duv is the distance between the transmitter u and the receiver v; δ is the constant
path loss exponent; and Kuv is a normalization constant that depends on the propagation
properties of the environment. In this work, we assumed that δ = 2 and K = 0.001. The
linear gain between the BS and the UE is given as follows:
GBj = 10−PL/10
, (4)
where PL is the path loss received by the small cell. The Okumura–Hata model was used
to predict path loss [2]:
PL = 140.7 +36.7 × log(dist[km]) dBm, (5)
where dist is the distance between the UE and the BS. The achievable data rate of D2D pair
d can be obtained by Shannon capacity:
C = wd × log2(1 + Γ), (6)
where wd is the bandwidth of the D2D pair shared with the UE.Sensors 2024, 24, 6079 8 of 21
3.2. System Model and Problem Formulation
The water-filling method aims to allocate the BS signal power to the UEs in such a
way as to maximize the sum of the network data rate and meet the constraint of allocating
power with positive values to the UEs, satisfying the BS power availability [18]. The
water-filling method was chosen because it solves the optimization problem described by
Equations (7)–(9) with linear computational complexity by solving a system with (Z + 1)
equations and (Z + 1) unknowns.
max
p
Z
∑
j=1
wj × log

1 + pj ×
GBj
σ2 + ∑D
d=1 pd × Gjd

, (7)
Subject to
Z
∑
i=j
pj ≤ Pbs, (8)
pj ≥ 0, i = 1,2,...,Z. Pbs ≥ 0, (9)
where Z is the total number of UEs, wj is the bandwidth allocated to the UE j, Pbs is the BS
power and pj = p1, p2,..., pZ is the power allocated to the UEs. The expression
GBj
σ2+∑D
d=1 pd×Gjd
represents the channel state information (csi). By applying Lagrange’s dual method (L),
the objective function (7) can be reduced to
L(p,λ) =
Z
∑
j=1
wj × log

1 + pj ×
GBj
σ2 + ∑D
d=1 pd × Gjd

− λ(
Z
∑
j=1
pj − Pbs), (10)
where λ is the Lagrange multiplier. A solution to the dual problem in Equation (10) is
obtained by setting the gradient to zero, i.e., ∇L(p,λ) = 0, as follows:
∂L(p,λ)
∂p
=
GBj
σ2+∑D
d=1 pd×Gjd
1 + pj ·
GBj
σ2+∑D
d=1 pd×Gjd
− λ = 0, (11)
pj =
1
λ
−
1
GBj
σ2+∑D
d=1 pd×Gjd
. (12)
Therefore, the power allocation for all UEs can be rewritten as follows:
pj(t) = max
(
0,
1
λt
−
σ2 + ∑D
d=1 pd × Gjd
GBj
)
,∀j = 1,2,...,Z. (13)
The choice for the λ value determines the “water level” for the constraint of the sum
of power allocated to the UEs, i.e., the total power consumed by the BS as shown in the
Figure 2. The algorithm considers it unnecessary to allocate power to some UEs given the
considerably high noise level, by limiting communication only to UEs with better channel
quality so that the data rate is as high as possible. This mechanism is especially crucial for
providing some QoS requirements in wireless networks.
Traditional approaches to solving the water-filling method consist of choosing the best
lambda value for allocating power to UEs to maximize throughput. In a modern wireless
network scenario with network slicing and D2D communication, the power allocation
problem is not only concerned about maximizing total throughput, but it also becomes
a part of the resource allocation, whose main objective is to meet the SLA requirements
of each slice. The choice of λ value, the main parameter for power allocation, is made by
an intelligent agent according to a reward function. Using the value of λ, we apply the
water-filling algorithm to allocate power to the UEs.Sensors 2024, 24, 6079 9 of 21
Figure 2. Power allocation using the water-filling algorithm.
In this paper, we propose modeling the problem of power and bandwidth allocation
through state transition, where the RL agent decides which action to take by exploring
the environment and maximizing the long-term reward [19]. The RL environment is
represented by three components, state, action, and reward, which are described below:
State: The system state s(t) is represented by the number of packets received NPR in
each slice i and by the csi each UE j.
s(t) = {NPRi,csij}. ∀i ∈ F, ∀j ∈ Z. (14)
Action: The action is given by the bandwidth w allocation to each slice i and by the
power allocation using Equation (13) through the λ value, which is discretized in two
decimal places ∈ (0.01, 1). The bandwidth is discretized in slots and can take discrete values
in the range of 1 to 2000 slots for a bandwidth total of 10 MHz in a time of 1 s.
a(t) = {wi,λ}. ∀i ∈ F. (15)
Reward: We propose that the reward function r(s(t),a(t)) be given by the weighted
sum from the Shannon channel capacity (C), by the package delivery rate (PDR) satisfaction
index to each slice and by the power allocated to UEs (pj). The PDR is obtained by dividing
the number of packets transmitted (NPT) by the total number of packets received (NPR).
The reward penalty occurs if the chosen action does not meet the SLA requirements or
exceeds the BS’s total available resources, as follows:
r(s(t),a(t)) =
(
0,if the action chosen is undesirable
∑F
i=1(α × Ci) + β × (PDRi − ∑Z
j=1 pj),
(16)
where α and β are constants used to add weight to values and maintain them with the same
number of digits. The SLAs impose stringent requirements on the PDR [1]. Generally, RL
agents learn with the main objective of maximizing the reward function. In this work, the
main objective is to reduce the least amount of signal transmission power possible; the
reward function is negative in the equation, thus minimizing its value.Sensors 2024, 24, 6079 10 of 21
3.3. Network Energy Efficiency
The power allocated to the UE is a crucial factor that directly influences the quality of
the communication channel. However, UEs communicating with D2D pairs using the same
channel resources creates the possibility of interference. This interference can reduce the
quality of the communication and even lead to a total loss of communication. Therefore,
power transmission control can be used to reduce the power of the interfering device,
which will reduce interference and improve communication quality [10].
D2D communication can reduce the total power consumption of UEs while providing
a reliable and efficient communication service. One metric by which efficient power
consumption can be assessed is energy efficiency, which in this work is given by the ratio
of total throughput to total power consumed, given by the equation below:
EE =
∑F
j=1 Cj + ∑D
d=1 Cd
∑Z
j=1 pj
. (17)
3.4. End-to-End Delay
End-to-end delay can be caused by a variety of factors, including optimal path selec-
tion, queue length, and communication period. The delay is calculated based on the time t
that the packets remain in the queue waiting for transmission. We assume a first-in-first-out
queue satisfying the SLA constraints in each service of Table 2. The traffic that cannot be
consumed in the current slot is queued to the next slot represented by the queuing equation,
given by
NPQ(t) = NPT(t) − NPR(t) + NPQ(t −1), (18)
where NPQ(t) is the number of packets in the queue at time t.
4. Deep Reinforcement Learning-Based Algorithms
This study considered reinforcement learning algorithms, in which the agent interacts
with the environment in discrete decision epochs. At each decision epoch t, the agent
observes the state s(t), takes action a(t) based on its policy π(s), and receives a reward
r(s(t),a(t)). The environment transitions into the next state s(t + 1). The goal is to find
the optimal policy π(s)∗ for mapping states to actions, which maximizes the discounted
cumulative reward, given as follows [5]:
R =
T
∑
t=0
γ × r(s(t),a(t)), (19)
where the discount factor γ ∈ [0,1) is a constant that deducts future rewards, and T
represents how many time steps are still left in the training session or episode [5].
The Q-learning algorithm is based on searching for tabular values, and because the
space of states and actions in this work is large, it takes a long time to converge to a
good solution [19]. Thus, our work exploits the DQN; with DQN, the Q-value function
Q(s(t),a(t)) is approximated by a deep neural network (DNN), different from Q-learning
where the Q-value function is tabular values. DNNs are exploited to accelerate Q-learning
convergence and improve its generalization capability in new states. The DNN is denoted
by Q(s(t),a(t)|Θ), where Θ represents its parameters or weights. Another neural network
is used to increase the learning stability of the DQN. It is called the target Q-network, and
its weights Θ′ are periodically updated to follow the weights of the main Q-network [20].
The DQN algorithm is optimized iteratively, updating the weights Θ of its neural network
to minimize the Bellman loss function as follows [20]:Sensors 2024, 24, 6079 11 of 21
L(Θt) = Es(t),a(t),rt,s(t+1)[rt(s(t),a(t)) + γ × max
a(t+1)
Q(s(t +1),a(t +1)|Θ′
) (20)
−Q(s(t),a(t)|Θ)]2
.
where E[·] is the expectation operator.
The DQN algorithm tends to overestimate Q-values. This is because it uses the same
training transitions for action selection and evaluation, which can degrade the training
process and lead to sub-optimal policies. To solve the problem, we used the DDQN
technique, which employs two functions for the Q-value: one to select the best action and
the other to evaluate this action. The action selection is still based on the Θ weights. The
second Θ′ weights are used to evaluate the policy value. The DDQN algorithm uses the
following modified Bellman loss function to update its weights [20]:
L(Θt) = Es(t),a(t),rt,s(t+1)[rt(s(t),a(t)) + (21)
γ × Q(s(t +1),arg max
a(t+1)
Q(s(t +1),a(t +1)|Θ),Θ′
) − Q(s(t),a(t)|Θ)]2
.
4.1. Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient Algorithm
In [21], the DDPG was proposed by integrating DQN and the actor–critic method
to solve problems with a continuous, high-dimensional action space. DDPG is one of
the agents that perform policy learning using the gradient of the objective function (22)
that represents the expected long-term reward. The DDPG agent learns a policy that
is continuous and deterministic. To guarantee the exploration of the environment, the
trajectories generated by the agent come from another policy, which is stochastic and makes
DDPG an off-policy method. The space of observations can be discrete or continuous, but
the space of actions has to be continuous. The DDPG algorithm is model-free, i.e., it does not
need the model of the environment, and to perform learning, it learns both the deterministic
policy µ(s|θµ), parameterized by θµ, and the value function of the action–state pair for this
policy Q(s,a|θQ). Therefore, it uses actor–critic architecture.
∇θµ J ≈ E[∇θµ Q(s(t),a(t)|θQ
)|s=s(t),a=µ(s(t)|θµ)]. (22)
The authors in [22] show that the gradient of this objective function concerning the
parameters θµ is given by:
∇θµ J ≈ E[∇aQ(s(t),a(t)|θQ
)|s=s(t),a=µ(s(t)) · ∇θµ µ(s(t)|θµ
)|s=s(t)]. (23)
Note that the equation above is in the format of the actor–critic architecture, where the
actor is related with ∇θµµ(s(t)|θµ) and the critic is related with ∇aQ(s(t),a(t)|θQ). The
actor–critic method consists of a neural network, called the actor, and another, called the
critic. The actor network takes the state as its input and produces a value for the action,
while the critic network is a Q-value network that takes both state and action as the input
and produces the Q-value as a single output. As in the DQN, the DDPG also uses target
networks that are time-delayed copies of their original networks, which slowly follow the
learned networks. Another DQN feature used in the DDPG is the replay buffer (Rb) for
the experiment sample to update the neural network parameters, as shown in Figure 3.
Figure 3 shows the learning process of the DDPG-KRP algorithm in steps.Sensors 2024, 24, 6079 12 of 21
Figure 3. DDPG-KRP architecture, the red and blue circles represent the actions in continuous and
discrete space, respectively.
In Algorithm 1, the parameters of the copies are updated periodically at every τ time
in a smoothed manner concerning the originals through a first-order filter with a smoothing
factor (ρ) of 10−5. These copies are called target networks. Using these target network
values greatly improves the learning stability [20]. Algorithm 1 maintains a parameterized
actor function, µ(s|θµ), that specifies the current policy, deterministically mapping states
to a specific action. The critic network Q(s,a|θQ) learns using the Equation (24). The actor
is updated following the chain rule applied to the expected return from the start of the J
distribution as Equation (23) [5,21].
L =
1
N
N
∑
i=1
(y(i) − Q(s(i),a(i)|θQ
))2
, (24)
where y(i) for i = 1,..., N are the desired output values for the training input samples given
by the Bellman loss function, i.e., y(i) = r(i)+γ×Q′(s(i +1),µ′(s(i +1)|θµ′
)|θQ′
) where
µ′(s(i +1)|θµ′
) and Q′(s(i +1),µ′(s(i +1)|θµ′
)|θQ′
) are the target networks of the actor
and the critic, respectively.
Since DDPG generates a deterministic policy, to ensure the exploration of the environ-
ment, it was proposed to add a noise (η) in the actor output. In this case, the output of the
actor network is given by
a(t) = µ(s(t)|θµ
) + ηt. (25)Sensors 2024, 24, 6079 13 of 21
Algorithm 1: DDPG-KRP
1 Randomly initialize critic Q(s,a|θQ) and actor µ(s|θµ) networks with weights θQ
and θµ;
2 Initialize target network Q′ and µ′ with weights θQ′
, θµ′
;
3 Initialize replay buffer R;
4 for episode from 1 to M do
5 Receive initial observation state s(1);
6 for t from 1 to T do
7 Select action for the current policy and exploration noise Equation (25);
8 a(t) = knnsearch(), that is, choose the nearest neighboring action [23];
9 if undesirable action then
10 r(t) = 0;
11 end
12 Execute action a(t) and observe reward r(t) and observe new state s(t +1);
13 Store transition (s(t), a(t), r(t), s(t +1)) in R;
14 Sample a random mini batch of N transitions (s(i), a(i), r(i), s(i +1)) from R;
15 Set y(i) = r(i) + γ × Q′(s(i +1),µ′ × (s(i +1)|θµ′
)|θQ′
);
16 Update the actor policy using the sampled policy gradient Equation (23);
17 Update the critic network by minimizing the loss Equation (24);
18 if mod(t,τ) == 0 then
19 Update the target networks;
20 θQ′
= ρ × θQ + (1 − ρ) × θQ′
;
21 θµ′
= ρ × θµ + (1 − ρ) × θµ′
;
22 end
23 end
24 end
In this paper, we propose using the Ornstein–Uhlenbeck process that generates a
temporally correlated noise of zero mean [24] during the training phase to balance the
exploration. The initial value of the standard deviation of the noise is 0.5, and the standard
deviation decay rate used is 0.01 per update step. The target parameters in both actor and
critic networks are updated with soft updates as follows:
θµ′
= ρ × θµ
+ (1 − ρ) × θµ′
. (26)
θQ′
= ρ × θQ
+ (1 − ρ) × θQ′
. (27)
4.2. K-Nearest Neighbors and Reward Penalization
DDPG was originally designed to handle continuous action spaces. However, resource
allocation is a discrete decision problem where the combination of the resource allocation
cannot exceed the available total value. Inspired by the approach in [15], we use the
KNN to discretize DDPG to adapt it to discrete action spaces. The basic idea is to use
a continuous-based algorithm to generate an initial continuous action first. Then, the K
nearest discrete actions are found using the KNN algorithm [23]. We chose the nearest
neighboring action, as shown in Figure 4.
In terms of computational overhead, the DDPG algorithm has a better training perfor-
mance because the action generated at the output of its actor neural network is related to
only one neuron, while the other methods have one neuron at the output of their neural
network for each possible combination of actions, which in our scenario amounts to ap-
proximately 500,000 combinations. Therefore, our proposed approach that uses the KNN
algorithm improves the performance of the DDPG-KRP algorithm as well as the efficiency
of the DDPG considering large networks. Several recent works have attempted to solve the
problem of some RL approaches presenting a large discrete action space by discretizing
the continuous action space [15,25]. In this sense, as shown by the proposed Algorithm 1,Sensors 2024, 24, 6079 14 of 21
a KNN approximation is used because of its agile search in logarithmic time and maps a
continuous action space to a discrete action space [15,23]. We propose applying a method
of eliminating undesired actions to the DDPG agent that consists of penalizing the reward
function, i.e., during the training phase, if the actor–network generates an action that does
not satisfy the SLA constraints and exceeds transmission power available, the reward will
be a value of 0.
Actor network
Action
λ
ѡ1
ѡ2
0.556
20.4
30.8
λ
ѡ1
ѡ2
0.55
20
30
λ
ѡ1
ѡ2
0.55
20
31
λ
ѡ1
ѡ2
0.55
21
30
λ
ѡ1
ѡ2
0.55
21
31
λ
ѡ1
ѡ2
0.56
21
31
λ
ѡ1
ѡ2
0.56
21
30
λ
ѡ1
ѡ2
0.56
20
31
λ
ѡ1
ѡ2
0.56
20
30
Discrete actions space
Continuous action space
Figure 4. KNN algorithm applied to discretize the value of the action generated at the output of the
actor neural network.
This work presents an advance by proposing a joint allocation of bandwidth and
power in a complex wireless network scenario composed of network slicing and D2D com-
munication since few works in the literature present resource allocation in mobile networks
considering these two next-generation wireless network technologies. In this work, we
propose an improvement to the DDPG algorithm using KNN and reward penalization to
make its learning more efficient so that resource allocation is more adaptive to this new
mobile communication scenario and meets the SLA requirements of each network slice.
4.3. Reducing the Action Space
The size of the action space in mobile network resource allocation considering the NS
paradigm is very high, as it is proportional to the number of services in the network and the
possible combinations of actions. The number of possible decisions exponentially increases
with slots and services. Due to this huge action space, the BS will likely exploit undesirable
actions during the training phase, such as allocating resources that cannot satisfy the data
rate constraints and delay requirements or those exceeding the total amount of availableSensors 2024, 24, 6079 15 of 21
resources, which will slow down the training convergence speed and prevent the DRL from
maximizing the reward. In this work, we consider resource allocation in a simulation time
of 1 s, that is, 2000 slots to be allocated among the two services, so the number of possible
combinations for the two services will be 2000 ×2000 = 4 ×106.
As in [11], for the DQN and DDQN algorithms, we use action elimination to solve
the high-dimensionality problem of the action space. Action elimination is the technique
of excluding combinations of undesirable actions from the space of actions in order to
increase the velocity and quality of the training policy. After a sufficient number of training
episodes, the elimination of undesirable actions allows the trained RL network (DQN and
DDQN) in BS to generate good strategies (i.e., resource allocation decisions). Due to the
neural network output of DQN and DDQN being composed of the number of possible
combinations of actions, training the neural network in simulations becomes impractical
without eliminating the undesired actions to reduce the action space.
To solve the problem of undesirable actions as in [11], we employ action elimination, a
technique for excluding undesirable actions among all possible combinations of actions,
increasing the speed and quality of the training policy. The algorithm consists of entering
the total number of available resources (ActionMax), in this case, the maximum number
of slots for allocation, which is 2000, as described in Section 3.2. It then determines the
slot allocation combinations between the two services (URLLC and video) that exceed
ActionMax, as shown in Algorithm 2. Due to the elimination of undesirable actions, after a
reasonable number of training episodes, the agent makes resource allocation decisions that
improve throughput and satisfy the SLA constraints of each service without exceeding the
total amount of available resources.
Algorithm 2: Action elimination
1 Input: ActionMax;
2 for iurllc from 1 to ActionMax do
3 for ivideo from 1 to ActionMax do
4 if iurllc + ivideo ≤ ActionMax then
5 if The set of actions meet the SLAs of the slices then
6 w = [iurllc,ivideo];
7 end
8 end
9 end
10 end
5. Evaluation Results
5.1. Experimental Design
In this section, we evaluate the DDPG-KRP algorithm performance with the network
simulations with NS and D2D paradigms. In the simulations, we considered 1 BS and
7 network slices based on two categories of services (i.e., URLLC and video) with D2D
communications. Table 2 shows each category of services with the specified number slice,
UEs, And the D2D pair links are represented by a Poisson distribution. The simulations
were performed using the following software and hardware configurations: MATLAB
software version R2023b, 1.00 GHz Intel Core i5-1035G1 processor, and 16 GB RAM with
no dedicated video card. The parameters for the mobile network scenario were similar to
those used in [1,9,16]. Table 3 presents the full set of parameters for the simulations.
We implemented the DDPG-KRP algorithm to solve the resource allocation problem in
each network slice. The actor neural network was implemented with four fully connected
hidden layers with 256 neurons each and the leaky ReLU activation function. Meanwhile,
the critic neural network was utilized considering three fully connected hidden layers with
128 neurons each and the leaky ReLU activation function. The learning rates for both the
actor and critic networks were 0.01. The batch size was 256. The replay buffer (R) size was
10,000. The discount factor for the cumulative reward was 0.90.Sensors 2024, 24, 6079 16 of 21
The performance of the proposed DDPG-KRP algorithm was compared with those
of two other DRL methods (i.e., DQN and DDQN) considering the same reward function
proposed in Equation (16) and the action discretization using percentages and by also
eliminating the undesirable actions for the DQN and DDQN algorithms. The neural
network of the two methods was implemented with four fully connected hidden layers
with 64 neurons in each and the leaky ReLU activation function. The hyperparameters
were set with a 0.01 learning rate, 0.1 random action choice chance, 0.9 discount factor,
256 batch size, and 10,000 replay buffer size.
The hyperparameters of the DDQN and DDPG were found by simple search until
the smallest value was obtained for the loss function given by Equations (21) and (24),
respectively. Notice that in this work, we used the same neural network for the DDQN and
DQN, so they have the same network hyperparameter value.
Table 3. Simulation parameters.
Parameters Values
BS power (Pbs) 10 W
Transmission power D2D 0.1 W
Noise power −114 dBm
Small cell radius 300 m
Maximum distance between a D2D pair 30 m
TTI 1 ms
Number of OFDM symbols per TTI 7
Simulation time 1000 TTI
RB bandwidth 180 KHz
Bandwidth 10 MHz
RBs per TTI 100
Mobility model UEs and D2D pairs are uniformly distribute
in the small cell to each TTI
Replay buffer (Rb) 10,000
Weight on channel capacity (α) 0.1
Weight on PDR (β) 10,000
Q-value update 1 s (2000 scheduling slots)
5.2. Results and Discussion
After the agents performed the resource allocation for the slices, the power and
bandwidth allocations were shared equally for the UEs in each slice. The performance of
the RL algorithms was analyzed for over 3000 episodes in training. For a larger amount of
episodes, we observed no significant changes in the results obtained with the considered
agents. Figure 5a–c present the learning process of the agents in radio resource management.
We plotted the reward values as a function of the number of episodes in the training phase.
The sub-figures depict that the discounted long-term reward tends to gradually increase as
the number of training episodes increases. The mean and immediate rewards presented
random values due to the stochastic behavior of the environment. Figure 5a illustrates that
the discounted long-term reward of the DQN agent becomes constant after 500 episodes
due to the Q-value overestimation. In Figure 5b, the DDQN agent improves the result
related to the other approaches by employing two evaluation functions in its learning
method. In Figure 5c, DDPG-KRP shows faster convergence in training and higher reward
values compared to the other considered approaches, which indicate better learning, as we
expected, due to good learning ability in high-dimensional action space.Sensors 2024, 24, 6079 17 of 21
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000
Episode Number
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Reward
1011
Episode Reward
Average Reward
Discounted Long-Term Reward
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000
Episode Number
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
1011
Episode Reward
Average Reward
Discounted Long-Term Reward
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000
Episode Number
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
1011
Episode Reward
Average Reward
Discounted Long-Term Reward
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 5. Reward comparison of different DRL agents: (a) DQN; (b) DDQN; and (c) DDPG-KRP.
Figures 6–10 show a detailed comparison of the performance and results for the DRL
agents after training. According to Table 2, a high weight β is assigned in the reward
function to increase the number of digits and increase the priority of the PDR in each slice.
Figure 6 shows that the resource allocation using the DQN algorithm does not allocate
all available resources generating a low PDR. The DDQN algorithm can allocate almost
all available resources but does not meet the PDR of all services. Compared to the DQN
and DDQN algorithms, the proposed DDPG-KRP algorithm allows the agent to act by
penalizing actions that do not meet the SLA requirements of each slice or by exceeding
the total amount of available resources. DDPG-KRP generates a deterministic action in
continuous space and then this action is discretized by the KNN algorithm. Figure 6
corroborates our belief that the DDPG-KRP presents better learning of the complicated
relationship between demand and PDR than the other agents since all available resources
are used and better performance in terms of the PDR is achieved compared to the other
considered approaches.
Bandwidth (% slot)
0.63
0.71 0.7
0.07 0.08
0.3
DQN DDQN DDPG - KRP
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
URLLC
Video
Package delivery rate (%) 1 1 1
0.28866
0.3299
1
DQN DDQN DDPG - KRP
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
URLLC
Video
(a) (b)
Figure 6. Performance comparison of different DRL agents for (a) bandwidth allocation. (b) PDR.
Figure 7 compares the throughput by each DRL agent with the increase in UEs for
each service. The traffic demands of the URLLC service are high because of the packet size.
Given the higher transmission volume and the strictly lower latency requirement, the DRL
agent learns to allocate a larger amount of resources to these slices, which shows a higher
throughput. We observe that the proposed DDPG-KRP achieves a significant gain over the
other methods. The highest throughput values for each service are because of its learning
ability to allocate all available resources to the slices. We have applied a t-test to verify if
the difference between the throughput values of Figure 7 for each approach is zero. We
have found that the test does reject the null hypothesis at the 5% significance level.Sensors 2024, 24, 6079 18 of 21
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
UEs
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Average throughput (Mbps)
URLLC
DQN
DDQN
DDPG - KRP
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
UEs
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Average throughput (Mbps)
Video
DQN
DDQN
DDPG - KRP
(a) (b)
Figure 7. Performance comparison of different DRL agents for throughput and average delay in
packet transmission: (a) URLLC slice throughput and (b) video slice throughput.
The average delay is given by the average value for 1000 TTIs. Figure 8 compares
the average delay values between the three DRL agents considering the complete system
with all two services. The mathematical formulation of the average delay is not easy.
Thus, the average delay is calculated based on a queue maintained in the BS, according to
Equation (18). Figure 8 shows the better performance of the DDPG-KRP compared to the
other algorithms. We have also applied a t-test to verify if the difference between the delay
and throughput results of Figure 8 for each approach is zero. We have found that the test
does reject the null hypothesis at the 1% significance level.
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
D2D pairs
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.01
0.012
0.014
0.016
0.018
Average delay (s)
DQN
DDQN
DDPG - KRP
Figure 8. Average latency for each agent considering the two services.
Figure 9 depicts that for the cellular wireless network, the increase in the number of
D2D pairs causes an increase in the energy efficiency once increased throughput due to the
spectrum reuse. To achieve good EE performance, devices must be able to communicate
with each other using as little power as possible. This is a challenge for D2D communica-
tion because it often requires more transmission power than traditional communication
methods [10]. The EE metric considered in this paper is given by Equation (17). In Figure 9,
the DDPG-KRP shows the best result in terms of the EE.Sensors 2024, 24, 6079 19 of 21
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
D2D pairs
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
Total Energy Efficiency (bps/W)
109
DQN
DDQN
DDPG-KRP
Figure 9. Energy efficiency by the number of D2D pairs for each agent.
Figure 10 shows the spectral efficiency (SE) value when varying the signal transmission
power of the D2D pairs from 0 to 1 W. The remaining parameters stay the same. The results
of Figure 10 are obtained by considering all two services. The SE metric is the ratio of the
throughput to the allocated bandwidth. Figure 10b shows that the SE of the D2D pairs
increases with the increasing signal transmission power. Accordingly, the highest value is
achieved by the DDPG-KRP. However, in Figure 10a, the transmission signal power of the
D2D pair should be increased in a controlled manner because it interferes with the UEs
and degrades their performance requirements. The allocation of inappropriate resources
and transmission power to the D2D pair introduces excessive interference, which could
impair UE communication.
0 0.10 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
D2D power (W)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Spectral Efficiency (UEs) (bps/Hz)
DQN
DDQN
DDPG-KRP
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
D2D power (W)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Spectral Efficiency (D2D) (bps/Hz)
DQN
DDQN
DDPG-KRP
(a) (b)
Figure 10. Spectral efficiency by the transmission signal power of the D2D pairs for each agent:
(a) UEs; (b) D2D pairs.
6. Conclusions
This work introduced an algorithm based on a DDPG agent, incorporating the KNN
algorithm and reward penalization for undesirable actions, to address the resource allo-
cation problem involving NS and D2D communication, taking into account the SLAs of
each service. The mobile network reused the spectrum while considering the interference
effects on resource allocation for UEs and D2D pairs. Lowering the transmit power of the
D2D pairs reduced interference to the UEs, enabling the BS to also reduce its transmission
power. Consequently, this resulted in power savings for both the BS and the D2D pairs.
Considering a huge number of possible combinations for resource allocation in each
slice, the technique of eliminating the undesired actions was used to reduce the action space.Sensors 2024, 24, 6079 20 of 21
Consequently, it eliminated approximately 85% of the undesired actions. Comparing the
DDPG-KRP algorithm with the DRL-based techniques, namely the DQN and the DDQN,
the extensive simulations showed that the DDPG-KRP can achieve better results due to the
DRL-based approaches using the discrete action space, generating more delayed learning
due to the large number of neurons in the deep neural network output.
Deep reinforcement learning methods are considered promising techniques for re-
source allocation in wireless networks. By monitoring the environment, these DRL methods
provide interesting results without knowledge of the system statistics a priori because of
their high learning potential. In this work, the DRL agent learns to allocate bandwidth and
power by observing the network’s data traffic and information on the channel status of
the UEs. The simulation results confirmed the learning effectiveness of the DDPG-KRP
algorithm for allocating resources to UEs considering different services.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, H.H.d.S.L. and L.J.F.L.; methodology, H.H.d.S.L., T.W.d.L.S.
and F.H.T.V.; software, H.H.d.S.L. and L.J.F.L.; validation, H.H.d.S.L. and L.J.F.L.; formal analysis,
H.H.d.S.L., T.W.d.L.S. and F.H.T.V.; investigation, H.H.d.S.L. and L.J.F.L.; resources, F.H.T.V. and
T.W.d.L.S.; data curation, H.H.d.S.L.; writing—original draft preparation, H.H.d.S.L.; writing—review
and editing, H.H.d.S.L. and L.J.F.L.; visualization, F.H.T.V. and T.W.d.L.S.; supervision, F.H.T.V. and
T.W.d.L.S.; project administration, H.H.d.S.L.; funding acquisition, F.H.T.V. and T.W.d.L.S. All authors
have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in this study.
Data Availability Statement: Data are contained within the article.
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank Centro de Excelência em Redes Inteligentes
Sem Fio e Serviços Avançados (CERISE), Advanced Knowledge Center for Immersive Technologies
(AKCIT), Centro de Excelência em Inteligência Artificial (CEIA), Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento
de Pessoal de Nível Superior (CAPES), and the Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa no Estado de Goiás
(FAPEG) for their support and funding in the development of the research.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare that there are no competing interests.
References
1. Liu, Y.; Ding, J.; Liu, X. A Constrained Reinforcement Learning Based Approach for Network Slicing. In Proceedings of the 2020
IEEE 28th International Conference on Network Protocols (ICNP), Madrid, Spain, 13–16 October 2020; pp. 1–6. [CrossRef]
2. Nadeem, L.; Amin, Y.; Loo, J.; Azam, M.A.; Chai, K.K. Efficient Resource Allocation Using Distributed Edge Computing in D2D
Based 5G-HCN With Network Slicing. IEEE Access 2021, 9, 134148–134162. [CrossRef]
3. Moubayed, A.; Shami, A.; Lutfiyya, H. Wireless Resource Virtualization With Device-to-Device Communication Underlaying
LTE Network. IEEE Trans. Broadcast. 2015, 61, 734–740. [CrossRef]
4. Li, R.; Zhao, Z.; Sun, Q.; I, C.L.; Yang, C.; Chen, X.; Zhao, M.; Zhang, H. Deep Reinforcement Learning for Resource Management
in Network Slicing. IEEE Access 2018, 6, 74429–74441. [CrossRef]
5. Liu, Q.; Han, T.; Zhang, N.; Wang, Y. DeepSlicing: Deep Reinforcement Learning Assisted Resource Allocation for Network
Slicing. In Proceedings of the GLOBECOM 2020—2020 IEEE Global Communications Conference, Taipei, Taiwan, 7–11 December
2020; pp. 1–6. [CrossRef]
6. Wang, H.; Li, X.; Jhaveri, R.H.; Gadekallu, T.R.; Zhu, M.; Ahanger, T.A.; Khowaja, S.A. Sparse Bayesian learning based channel
estimation in FBMC/OQAM industrial IoT networks. Comput. Commun. 2021, 176, 40–45. [CrossRef]
7. Hussain, F.; Khan, M.A.M.; Moniruzzaman, M.; Alam, M.M.; Hossen, M.S. Efficient Power Control and Resource Allocation for
LTE-D2D Communication: A Multi-Objective Optimization Approach. IEEE Access 2024, 12, 61467–61483. [CrossRef]
8. de Melo, L.A.M.; Ferreira, M.V.G.; Vieira, F.H.T. Optimal Power Allocation and Delay Minimization Based on Conflict Graph
Algorithm for Device-to-Device Communications. Appl. Sci. 2023, 13, 13352. [CrossRef]
9. Sun, G.; Boateng, G.O.; Ayepah-Mensah, D.; Liu, G.; Wei, J. Autonomous Resource Slicing for Virtualized Vehicular Networks
With D2D Communications Based on Deep Reinforcement Learning. IEEE Syst. J. 2020, 14, 4694–4705. [CrossRef]
10. Logeshwaran, J.; Shanmugasundaram, N.; Lloret, J. Energy-efficient resource allocation model for device-to-device communica-
tion in 5G wireless personal area networks. Int. J. Commun. Syst. 2023, 36, e5524. [CrossRef]
11. Suh, K.; Kim, S.; Ahn, Y.; Kim, S.; Ju, H.; Shim, B. Deep Reinforcement Learning-Based Network Slicing for Beyond 5G. IEEE
Access 2022, 10, 7384–7395. [CrossRef]Sensors 2024, 24, 6079 21 of 21
12. Tellache, A.; Mekrache, A.; Bradai, A.; Boussaha, R.; Pousset, Y. Deep Reinforcement Learning based Resource Allocation in
Dense Sliced LoRaWAN Networks. In Proceedings of the 2022 IEEE International Conference on Consumer Electronics (ICCE),
Las Vegas, NV, USA, 7–9 January 2022; pp. 1–6. [CrossRef]
13. Souza Lopes, H.; Rocha, F.; Vieira, F. Deep Reinforcement Learning Based Resource Allocation Approach for Wireless Networks
Considering Network Slicing Paradigm. J. Commun. Inf. Syst. 2023, 38, 21–33. [CrossRef]
14. Smida, K.; Tounsi, H.; Frikha, M.; Song, Y.Q. FENS: Fog-Enabled Network Slicing in SDN/NFV-Based IoV. Wirel. Pers. Commun.
2023, 128, 2175–2202. [CrossRef]
15. An, Q.; Segarra, S.; Dick, C.; Sabharwal, A.; Doost-Mohammady, R. A Deep Reinforcement Learning-Based Resource Scheduler
for Massive MIMO Networks. arXiv 2023, arXiv:2303.00958. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.00958.
16. Lopes, V.H.L.; Nahum, C.V.; Dreifuerst, R.M.; Batista, P.; Klautau, A.; Cardoso, K.V.; Heath, R.W. Deep Reinforcement Learning-
Based Scheduling for Multiband Massive MIMO. IEEE Access 2022, 10, 125509–125525. [CrossRef]
17. Zulhasnine, M.; Huang, C.; Srinivasan, A. Efficient resource allocation for device-to-device communication underlaying LTE
network. In Proceedings of the 2010 IEEE 6th International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Computing, Networking and
Communications, Niagara Falls, ON, Canada, 11–13 October 2010; pp. 368–375. [CrossRef]
18. Ding, Z. (Ed.) Applications of Machine Learning in Wireless Communications; Telecommunications, Institution of Engineering and
Technology: London, UK, 2019; pp. 371–405.
19. Chakraborty, S.; Sivalingam, K. DRL-based admission control and resource allocation for 5G network slicing. Sādhanā 2023, 48,
155. [CrossRef]
20. Alwarafy, A.; Abdallah, M.M.; Ciftler, B.S.; Al-Fuqaha, A.I.; Hamdi, M. Deep Reinforcement Learning for Radio Resource
Allocation and Management in Next Generation Heterogeneous Wireless Networks: A Survey. arXiv 2021, arXiv:2106.00574.
[CrossRef]
21. Lillicrap, T.P.; Hunt, J.J.; Pritzel, A.; Heess, N.; Erez, T.; Tassa, Y.; Silver, D.; Wierstra, D. Continuous control with deep
reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2016, San Juan,
Puerto Rico, 2–4 May 2016. [CrossRef]
22. Silver, D.; Lever, G.; Heess, N.; Degris, T.; Wierstra, D.; Riedmiller, M. Deterministic Policy Gradient Algorithms. In Proceedings
of the 31st International Conference on International Conference on Machine Learning, Beijing, China, 21–26 June 2014; Volume 32,
pp. I-387–I-395.
23. Muja, M.; Lowe, D.G. Scalable Nearest Neighbor Algorithms for High Dimensional Data. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.
2014, 36, 2227–2240. [CrossRef]
24. Uhlenbeck, G.E.; Ornstein, L.S. On the Theory of the Brownian Motion. Phys. Rev. 1930, 36, 823–841. [CrossRef]
25. Dulac-Arnold, G.; Evans, R.; van Hasselt, H.; Sunehag, P.; Lillicrap, T.; Hunt, J.; Mann, T.; Weber, T.; Degris, T.; Coppin, B. Deep
Reinforcement Learning in Large Discrete Action Spaces. arXiv 2015, arXiv:1512.07679. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.